TransCanada pleased that Keystone XL regulatory process continues to move forward

Washington, DC (March 15, 2011) - TransCanada Corporation (TSX, NYSE:
TRP) (TransCanada) today confirmed that the regulatory process for
the Keystone XL pipeline has now entered the final stages of review
by the U.S. Department of State.

"Keystone XL has been under review since 2008 and we are confident we
have addressed the major questions raised by regulators and government
agencies," said Russ Girling, TransCanada's president and chief
executive officer. "We expect a final regulatory decision for this
project by late 2011 and we are pleased the Department of State has
committed it will conclude its review of Keystone XL by the end of the
year. The Keystone expansion is expected to be operational in 2013."

Since 2008, TransCanada has held over 90 open houses and public
meetings along the pipeline route; given hundreds of hours of testimony
to local, state and federal officials and submitted thousands of pages
of information to government agencies in response to questions. The
Department of State concluded in the spring of 2010 that Keystone
XL would have limited impact on the environment during construction
and operation.

"A growing number of opinion leaders, elected officials, labour
unions, associations and members of the public are showing their
support for Keystone XL," added Girling. "Instability and unrest in
Libya and other parts of the Middle East demonstrate the need for the
U.S. to receive a safe, secure, stable supply of oil - Keystone XL
will provide that. The project will help put America back to work,
creating 20,000 jobs and injecting billions into the U.S. economy."

The U.S. Department of Energy stated in a recent study that 'Increased
Canadian oil imports will help reduce U.S. imports of foreign oil from
sources outside of North America'. This supports TransCanada's point
that we can reduce America's dependence on oil from Venezuela and the
Middle East by up to 40 per cent with the Keystone XL pipeline. As
the American GI Forum of Texas recently pointed out, the oil that
the Keystone system will deliver is 'conflict free.'

The study also confirmed that the construction of Keystone XL would not
change global refinery carbon dioxide or total life cycle greenhouse
gas emissions. Earlier analysis by The Perryman Group out of Texas
regarding the economic benefits of the project concluded that:

* More than $585 million in new taxes will go to the states and
communities along the pipeline route

* An additional $5.2 billion in property taxes will be paid over the
operating life of the pipeline

* More than $6.5 billion in personal income will go to Americans

* U.S.-based producers will have new options to move crude oil to
American refineries.

"Keystone XL is a shovel-ready project that is funded completely by
private sector investment at no cost to American taxpayers," concluded
Girling. "It will be a safe, modern and leading-edge pipeline and we
have provided the Department of State and other agencies with the
facts regarding Keystone XL's design, safety, operating procedures
and limited environmental impact."