Final Environmental Impact Statement Re-Affirms Limited
Environmental Impact from Keystone XL Pipeline

WASHINGTON, D.C. - August 26, 2011 -TransCanada Corporation (TSX,
NYSE: TRP) (TransCanada) is pleased that the Final Environmental
Impact Statement (FEIS) for the Keystone XL crude oil pipeline has
reaffirmed the environmental integrity of the project.

This is the third Environmental Impact Statement that the
U.S. Department of State has issued on Keystone XL since the review
process began in 2008. "The Final Environmental Impact Statement
reaffirms the findings of the two previous environmental impact
statements that the Keystone XL pipeline will have no significant
impact on the environment," said Russ Girling, TransCanada's
president and chief executive officer. "Today's Final Environmental
Impact Statement continues to demonstrate the focus on safety and
the environment that has gone into the development of this critical
North American pipeline.

The environmental review process for Keystone XL (culminating in
the FEIS) has been the most exhaustive and detailed review for
a cross-border pipeline that has ever been undertaken by of the
Department of State.  "We know how hard the Department of State
has worked to make this review process as transparent and thorough
as possible, including consulting with more than 10 other federal
agencies," Girling added. "We appreciate their continued commitment
to completing their review by the end of this year."

The nine-volume FEIS is more than 1,000 pages in length. Keystone XL
has gone through an exhaustive 36-month review, including numerous
public meetings, multiple public comment periods, submittal and review
of thousands of pages of information and responses to hundreds of
detailed questions.

In TransCanada's preliminary review of the FEIS' findings, the company
notes that:

    The analysis of potential impacts associated with the project
    suggests that there would be no significant impacts to most
    resources along the proposed project corridor.  Incorporating the
    57 Project-specific Special Conditions developed by PHMSA would
    result in a Project that would have a degree of safety greater
    than any typically constructed domestic oil pipeline under current
    regulation; The proposed route is the shortest and would disturb
    the least amount of land and water bodies resulting in reduced
    environmental impacts. Alternative routes that were considered to
    avoid the Ogallala Aquifer and the Nebraska Sandhills are not
    preferable environmentally or otherwise.  Oil sands derived
    crude oil does not have unique characteristics that would
    suggest the potential for higher corrosion rates during pipeline
    transportation.

Now that the FEIS has been issued, a 90-day comment period begins to
determine if Keystone XL is in the national interest of the United
States. Girling believes it is.

"Support for Keystone XL continues to grow because the public,
opinion leaders and elected officials can see the clear benefits
that this pipeline will deliver to Americans," added Girling. "The
fundamental issue is energy security. Through the Keystone system,
the U.S. can secure access to a stable and reliable supply of oil
from Canada where we protect human rights and the environment, or
it can import more higher-priced oil from nations who do not share
America's interests or values."

In addition to energy security, Keystone XL will create massive and
much needed economic benefits to the states it crosses and the United
States as a whole. The project will be financed entirely through
the private sector without one penny of government subsidy. During
operations, TransCanada will contribute over $5 billion in property
taxes to the communities Keystone XL will pass through. In total,
the Keystone XL project is expected to create $20 billion of economic
stimulus to the US during construction.

The benefits of Keystone XL are not limited however to the states where
the pipeline will be located.  From pipe manufactured in Arkansas
to pump motors made in Ohio, workers in almost every state in the
United Sates benefit from the project and the ongoing development of
Canada's oil sands. Within days of receiving regulatory approval for
Keystone XL, TransCanada will begin to put 20,000 Americans to work to
construct the project. In addition to these direct jobs, independent
studies calculate that the construction of Keystone XL will create
an additional 118,000 indirect and spin-off jobs for local businesses.

If construction of the pipeline begins early in 2012, Keystone XL is
expected be operational in 2013.