UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF STATE  Keystone XL Oil Pipeline Project  PUBLIC COMMENT MEETINGS  Tuesday, September 27, 2011  Pershing Center  226 Centennial Mall South  Lincoln, Nebraska 68508  The Keystone XL Public Comment Meeting convened  at 12 o'clock noon before a Panel:  TERESA HOBGOOD, U.S. Department of State,  presiding officer.  MICHAEL STEWART, U.S. Department of State,  presiding officer.  P R O C E E D I N G S  
MS. HOBGOOD: Hello and good afternoon. My name is Teresa Hobgood, and I am from the U.S. State Department in Washington, D.C. My colleague, Michael Stewart and I are here today to listen to your comments regarding the national interest determination for the proposed Keystone XL pipeline. On behalf of the Department of State, we would like to thank the people of Nebraska for joining us at this public meeting in Lincoln. We recognize that this is an important issue, and we value your input. We also would like to thank the Pershing Center for agreeing to host the meeting. The purpose of this meeting is for you, members of the public, whether you are a farmer or scientist, to express your views on whether issuing a Presidential Permit for the proposed Keystone XL pipeline is in the national interest. To focus time and attention on your comments, we will not be answering questions at this or other public meetings in South Dakota, Kansas, Montana, Texas and Washington, D.C. Before we begin, we would like to describe the Department of State's role in the Presidential Permitting process and lay out the ground rules for participating in this meeting. With regard to the role of the Department of State, in September of 2008, TransCanada Keystone Pipeline, LP filed an application for a Presidential Permit for the proposed Keystone XL pipeline. Executive Order 1337, signed on April 30, 2004, delegates to the Department of State the authority to issue a Presidential Permit for facilities such as the Keystone XL pipeline that cross the U.S. border. In considering a permit, the Department of State determines whether allowing the border crossing is in the U.S.' national interest, taking into account environmental and safety issues as well as energy security, foreign policy, and social and economic concerns. In addition to the Executive Order, the Department determined, because of the importance of the proposed pipeline, that it should evaluate the pipeline's possible environmental and safety impacts, consistent with the National Environmental Policy Act or NEPA. As a consequence, the State Department prepared an environmental impact statement or EIS consistent with NEPA to evaluate the proposed pipeline's potential environmental and safety impacts. In preparing the EIS over the past two and a half years, we have conducted some 41 public meetings along the pipeline route, and in Washington, D.C. to gather public comments in developing the scope and draft of the EIS. On August 26th we released the final EIS, which addresses the more than 250,000 comments from the public comment period. The Final EIS is just one factor considered in the review process. It does not represent a final decision on the permit application. Now as we move into the national interest determination phase, the Department of State is compiling additional information to determine if the proposed Keystone XL pipeline is in the national interest and decide whether to grant or deny the permit. Now turning to the ground rules for this public meeting. We hope to have the opportunity to listen to everyone who wishes to speak; and in order to allow the maximum amount of participation, we ask you to limit your comments to no more than three to five minutes. And because of the number of people who have signed up to speak, we really encourage you to limit your remarks to three minutes. The amount of time you will be allowed to comment will ultimately depend on the number of people who have signed up to share their points of view. Given the strong interest in this issue, it may not be possible for everyone who would like to speak to do so. If you do not have that opportunity, you can turn in your remarks today. I think there's a cardboard box on the stage where you can drop your prepared remarks if you don't have the opportunity to deliver them. You can also provide your written remarks on the back of the sheet of paper that was handed to you when you entered the room; and you can also submit your written comments via mail, fax, e-mail or on line. The handout you received provides all of the instructions you need for the submission of written comments. Written comments will be accepted through October 9 of this year. With the exception of any elected officials who wish to speak, speakers will make their comments on a first-come, first served basis by sign in number. When your number is called, we ask you to come to the microphone, state your name and affiliation, and off your comments. If you have an even number please line up in the aisle on my left, and if you have an odd number, please line up on the aisle to my right. As you speak, you will be timed. Again, our goal is to provide at least three minutes per person; but it could be less depending on the number of speakers. A card will be displayed when you have one minute remaining and when your time is up. We respectfully request you to finish your comments in the allotted time. If you go beyond your allotted time, it is possible that your microphone will be turned off, but that will be done as a last resort. Let me reiterate that Department of State officials are here to listen. We will not be engaging in a question and answer session. We understand there are strong views on both sides of this issue, and ask that in fairness to everyone, those who choose to speak be allowed to do so without interruption. All oral and written comments will be considered as part of our Record of Decision, and will be reviewed by the Department of State during the decision-making process. All comments made here will be transcribed by our official reporter. We plan on taking a break at 3:30 p.m. We may need to take a break at 2 o'clock for the reporter, so that he can get up and stretch; it's quite a chore for him to sit and take comments for such a long period of time. And so if we can give him five minutes at 2 p.m., I'm sure he'd appreciate it. After the break at 3:30 p.m. we will resume the public meeting at 4 o'clock. Again, we wish to stress that the Department of State has not yet made a decision on this matter. Thank you for your interest and for coming to this meeting. We'd like to start the proceedings now with the first speaker. Will you come to the microphone and state your name and affiliation.  
MR. WHATLEY: Good afternoon. My name is Michael Whatley, I'm the Executive Vice President for Consumer Energy Alliance. CEA is made up of more than 250,000 individuals and over 165 affiliate organizations that represent every sector of the U.S. economy, including truckers, highway users and shippers, manufacturers, iron and steel producers, farmers and chemical manufacturers and energy producers. CEA strongly supports the Keystone XL people because of the economic benefits it will provide. Not only to Nebraska but to the nation as a whole. The pipeline will create more than 7,500 jobs in Nebraska and over 120,000 jobs total across the United States. Even more, this project will generate over $11 million in state and local taxes for Nebraska, and create $20 billion in economic growth nationwide. That's a lot of money that will go to improving schools, roads and hospitals. The Keystone XL pipeline project will also strengthen our national security. Canada is our neighbor, our ally and our largest trading partner. The 700,000 barrels of oil per day that this pipeline will bring to the Gulf Coast refineries will be coming from places like Oklahoma, Montana, the Dakotas, and Canada. It is not subject to violent revolutions like we have seen this year in Egypt and Libya. It cannot be used as a political tool, like OPEC and Russian oil can. It is highly discounted from the prices we pay for our oil from the Persian Gulf, and will help drive down fuel prices for both our military and American drivers. Not only will the pipeline bring great economic and energy security benefits to Nebraska and the United States, it will do so without harming our water or our environment. The State Department's extensive environmental review of the pipeline concluded there is no scenario in which the Northern High Plains Aquifer would be adversely affected. The State Department also studied over a dozen other routes for the pipeline, and found the current route is the safest alternative, and that alternative routes would disturb land and cross more bodies of water than the proposed route. Over 20,000 miles of pipeline already cross the Ogallala. Keystone XL will be built with state-of-the-art technology, and pipelines are the safest, most efficient way to transport oil. To conclude, it is clear that it is in the national interest to allow construction of this important pipeline. Because it will be environmentally safe, will create thousands of high paying jobs, will significantly boost the U.S. economy and enhance our energy security, CEA asks on behalf of energy consumers nationwide that the administration grant the Presidential Permit and allow the construction of the Keystone XL pipeline. Thank you.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. If we can have the next three to four speakers line up so that we can get to as many speakers as possible, I'd really appreciate it. Speaker No. 2.  
MS. HUTFLESS: ...my right to speak, thank you.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Speaker No. 3  
MR. KIELY: I am Joe Kiely, I am the Vice President of Operations for the Ports-to-Plains Alliance, including the Heartland Expressway Association here in Nebraska. The Ports-to-Plains Alliance is a grassroots coalition of over 120 cities, counties, businesses, economic development organizations and chambers of commerce from a ten state transportation and economic region that runs from Texas to Alberta, Canada. The Keystone pipeline is proposed to go through our region, and our members are the most likely to be impacted by any positive or negative impacts. The Keystone XL pipeline will provide significant economic benefits for our region, some 20,000 manufacturing and construction jobs that are badly needed. Especially important in rural America, where we see population declines in the past few decades. During the construction the taxes that will come to both state and local governments will help them struggling to balance their budgets. As leaders from the region that the Keystone pipeline will traverse, we applaud the Department of State's thoroughness in the approval process, and appreciate the multiple opportunities for public input on the project. You have fully analyzed the environmental impact and rightfully concluded that there are no substantial economic concerns that should prevent the construction of this valuable energy infrastructure project. We were particularly interested in the potential of the Ogallala Aquifer, the major source of drinking water not only in Nebraska but across many of our states. And yet it was determined by a multiyear study that different routes would disturb more land and cross more water bodies than the proposed route. It's critical to our country's efforts to reduce our dependence on Middle East and Venezuelan oil as well as increasing our access to supplies from Canada, our neighbor and loyal ally. It's also to domestic supplies that are available from the Bakken formation in Montana and North Dakota. The pipeline will displace about half of the oil that the U.S. currently imports from the Middle East. The Keystone pipeline is clearly in the nation's interest; will be a valuable tool in strengthening our national security and energy security; therefore we respectively request that upon the completion of the review period, the Department of State move expeditiously to approve the pipeline and grant TransCanada the Presidential Permit it needs to proceed. In addition to my statement that I will enter, I have a letter from 29 mayors of cities, 19 county commissioner or county judges, and 65 signators in total, including our Board of Directors. Thank you.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker No. 4.  
BRIG GENERAL AMUNDSON: My name is Brigadier General  Roma Amundson. I served 33 years in the United States Army/Nebraska National Guard. I support the Keystone pipeline expansion in the United States, and the reason that I do so is related to national security concerns. Our national security is negatively impacted by two things: Our budget deficit, and dependency on foreign oil. I believe that the Keystone pipeline expansion addresses both concerns. Our budget deficit and dependency on foreign oil cause the United States to run the risk of being subjected to foreign policies and threats from other countries. Countries holding our debt and those importing oil to us can pull our strings, so to speak, by threatening us on the basis of our fiscal situation and our energy needs. Let me give two examples. As of December 2010, $4.4 trillion of United States debt are held by foreign countries and international corporations, the first ten being China, Japan, United Kingdom, oil exporters Brazil, the Caribbean banking centers, Taiwan, Russia, Hong Kong and Switzerland. China has over $1,160 billion of our debt, and because of that, one top Chinese money manager asked Tim Geitner for a favor; to press our Federal Reserve to speed the approval of China's $1.2 billion investment in Morgan Stanley. China also shifted its United States Treasury holdings away from the longer-term notes, which impacted our borrowing rates and it also holds our debt in Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, two very large corporations in financial trouble, which touch the lives of many thousands of homeowners. Second example, ten foreign countries import 75 percent of the United States oil supply: Saudi Arabia, Venezuela, Nigeria, Iraq, Angola, Canada, Mexico, Algeria, Brazil and Kuwait. Venezuela is the fourth largest importer of oil to the United States and is openly hostile to us. In fact, Hugo Chavez warned the United States over its Iran policy, and because of the importance of Venezuela's oil to us forced us to consider his threats more seriously than what we would have if we were not so dependent on their oil. Saudia Arabia imports oil to the United States while at the same time gives financial support to groups having Islamic fundamentalist ties. Obviously, some of its national objectives run counter to those of the United States; yet because we are dependent upon Saudia Arabia's oil imports, we deal with them. So enter the Keystone pipeline. Canada and the United States share a cultural, political and economic interest. Canada is a friendly and reliable neighbor, and even now is our number one source of imported oil. Working with them on the Keystone pipeline will strengthen our energy security by increasing the imports from them and allowing us to transport some of our own domestic oil from the northern states to refineries, thus easing our dependence on imports from countries unfriendly to us or not sharing common objectives. I do understand that people are worried that the pipelines planned to cross the Ogallala Aquifer may adversely affect us and our environment; however, I believe that those concerns have been adequately addressed by the economic impact study. Franklin Delano Roosevelt said during his first inaugural speech that "the only thing we have to fear is fear itself." I believe that the fear of what potentially could happen in the future regarding the pipeline's possible impact on the environment, specifically the Ogallala Aquifer, is one that should be balanced against the actual needs of our national security. First, we need jobs, employment and domestic industrial strength to reduce our budget deficit, which is a millstone around our nation's neck; and second, if our national policy continues to be one that restricts our own domestic energy production, we need to rely upon friendly and reliable sources such as Canada to get the oil needed by the United States. Our energy security would be significantly strengthened by having the Keystone pipeline as would our industrial base. For these reasons, relating to national security, I support the Keystone pipeline.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you.    
MS. HOBGOOD: Speaker No. 5.  Senator Smith: Good afternoon. I am State Senator Jim Smith, and I represent the 14th Legislative District of the Nebraskan Unicameral, where I serve on the Natural Resources Committee. Last session, we had much discussion on this issue, and I am here today to express my support for the construction of the Keystone XL pipeline, and the significant economic and energy security benefits it will bring to my constituents and to the great people of Nebraska. As a State legislator, I know well the difficulties that this recession has had on local economies and on Nebraska's families and businesses. However, this construction project and the operation of the completed pipeline will provide economic benefits to Nebraska by creating thousands of much- needed jobs, by creating new business activity, and by contributing over $11 million in state and local taxes. As many of our businesses here in Nebraska understand, Canada is one of our best customers, purchasing over $1.3 billion in Nebraska goods and services every year. Supporting the construction of the pipeline and continued development of North American energy resources will only serve to expand trade between our two countries. Now I understand that many of my constituents, and many across Nebraska have concerns about the environmental safety of this project, specifically its potential impact on the Ogallala Aquifer. Fortunately, the Department of State shared our concerns during its extensive, three-year environmental assessment of the project. During its review, the Department of State examined several oil spill scenarios and the potential impacts a spill could have on the aquifer. In its Final Environmental Impact Statement the Department of State concluded that, and I quote: "In no spill incident scenario would the entire Northern High Plains Aquifer system be adversely affected" unquote. Furthermore, the Department of State examined over a dozen alternative routes, including five alternatives that would avoid or minimize the length traversed over the aquifer. However, it was determined that these alternate routes would, quote "disturb more lands and cross more bodies of water than the proposed route" unquote. Clearly, the route chosen is the most optimal choice for efficiency, safety and environmental protection. I believe the operator, TransCanada, will construct and operate the pipeline at the highest degrees of safety; but I also know that officials like me will work to ensure that TransCanada does not waiver in its commitment to environmental protection. In conclusion, Nebraska businesses, consumers and taxpayers, will all gain great economic and energy security benefits from this project. Therefore I strongly urge the Department of State to conclude that the Keystone XL pipeline is in the nation's best interest and to issue the Presidential Permit as swiftly as possible. I thank you for coming to visit us in Lincoln today, and for taking time to listen to Nebraskans. Thank you.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker No. 6.    
MR. WHITEHEAD: Good morning. My name is Mark Whitehead, and I'm testifying as President of the Nebraska Petroleum Marketers Convenience Store Association. On August 16th, our Board passed a resolution in support of the Keystone XL pipeline. We do not do so lightly; we fully recognize that many of our members' customers had mixed feelings about this project. We recognize that our profits would not be affected by this pipeline. In fact that, our profit margins are affected by what our competition does in the street. As the last in the second last link to a supply chain, we understand that this is the most efficient and safest distribution system in the world. With a day-to-day realizing the effects of the different energy policies and the market conditions that affect the energy that we and our customers depend on. Since we live with these market conditions every day, we don't have the luxury of taking philosophical stances on visions of what things would be like if oil and gasoline weren't interwoven so tightly into our daily lives and well-being. The fact is, petroleum has done more to improve the standard of living over the last century than any other single innovation. While other energy technologies will emerge, petroleum will remain our most reliable source of energy for the foreseeable future. We take pride in our position as a provider to our customers of a product that fuels their freedom, which is to say their cars. Our customer's second largest expense in their personal budget is what they commit to their personal transportation. We passed this resolution because we recognize the importance of a safe and reliable energy source to our customers. We also recognize the importance of delivering this product in an environmentally-responsible fashion; to do otherwise makes no sense. Speaking personally, I am proud of mine and my company's efforts in conservation. In the early Nineties, we took part in a development project where we donated 100 acres of pasture ground to the Lower Platte South Natural Resource District to restore indo saline wetlands, which is the home of the Salt Creek Tiger Beetle. We hold the development out as a model of what can happen when business and environmental interests work hand-in-hand to accomplish a project. We are proud of the fact that we are in the State's natural resources highest district honor, the Master Conservationalist Award. We were the first company that this award has ever been presented to. I also have been working for the last 20 years on the Nebraskan Environmental Quality Council, where I currently serve as the chair. Over those 20 years, I've seen time and again how well the Nebraska Department of Environmental Quality has balanced environmental and development issues to the betterment of our State. I have the utmost confidence that they will be able to preside over this pipeline. As owners of underground storage tanks, we know what it's like to take responsibility for the environmental consequences of our business. Currently there are 2 million barrels of petroleum product being moved through 25,000 miles of pipeline over the Ogallala Aquifer already. We have recognized the efforts of TransCanada to make this the safest pipeline ever constructed in the United States. We fully understand that to do otherwise makes no sense, because they are both morally and financially responsible for any problems that may occur. We don't financially benefit directly from the pipeline; our suppliers will provide us with product with or without it. But our members hear the concerns from our customers every single day about the high price they pay for fuel. To the extent that this pipeline will provide product efficiently and safely, it will make our country more secure and provide a more economical product to deliver to our members' customers, then as an association, we enthusiastically support it.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker No. 7.  
MR. NESBIT: For the record, my name is Tom Nesbit, I'm a retired, 33-year law enforcement veteran. I've spent over 27 years in the Nebraska State Patrol, and am the former colonel and superintendent of the Nebraska State Patrol. I appreciate the opportunity to be here today to share my thoughts on Keystone XL pipeline, and I'm here to support the Department of State's approval of the Keystone XL pipeline project granting TransCanada the Presidential Permit necessary to begin building this pipeline. I believe what many people are forgetting in this debate on the Keystone XL project is the reason why America needs this pipeline. The primary form of energy that fuels our transport, that drives our trucks, planes, school buses, ambulance and safety patrol cars, you name is, is gasoline. And gasoline comes from oil. And we will need oil to fuel our transportation requirements for decades to come, a fact even our own United States Department of Energy acknowledges. And unless some miraculous invention that will enable us to cost-effectively replace all of the millions of vehicles we have on the road today that rely on oil, I believe that fact to be true: America needs oil, and that oil can come from a friendly, reliable source in Canada via the Keystone XL pipeline. Let me now focus on the need for oil from a friendly, reliable source, from the perspective of protecting the safety of American citizens as a dedicated law enforcement, public servant for over 30 years. I became a state trooper in 1978, and served the State of Nebraska in law enforcement for most of my life, and most recently as a superintendent of law enforcement and public safety also known as the Nebraska State Patrol. The Nebraska State Patrol, unlike some other state in the United States, is the only statewide, full service, law enforcement agency. So our duties include working with communities to improve public safety, enforcing traffic, enforcing criminal and drug laws, investigating crimes as well as enforcing the laws and federal regulations pertaining to commercial motor carriers. As such, our State Patrol officers drive, on an average, over 10 million miles per year. I've seen, over my 30 years in law enforcement, with six years as a superintendent and the past six years since I retired, the difficult choices that have to be made when costs, such as the cost of gasoline, rises. Law enforcement agencies have fixed budgets, and as much as we'd like to seek an increase in funding when our costs rise, that is not always the case, especially in these tight economic times. Rising fuel costs require law enforcement agencies across the country to reduce the number of patrols on the street, or where we patrol, or cutting in other areas such as time, reducing miles, training of new hires, all of which directly impact public safety. And these impacts are felt not only in law enforcement but other areas of public safety such as fire department, ambulances and other emergency medical vehicles. The problem is not only limited to Nebraska. The same situation is playing out in police stations, highway patrol departments, hospitals and fire departments across the country. So when we rely on our source of oil from countries which do not share our interests, and crises such as that which recently occurred in the Middle East drive up the price of crude oil and thus the price for gasoline, our ability to protect the safety and well-being of our citizens is compromised. The decision seems to be straightforward. America should obtain our oil from a steady, reliable and friendly neighbor in order to protect the safety and well-being of our citizens. Yes, I care about the environment. I've been blessed to live in this beautiful State of Nebraska for over 50 years. I have two beautiful children and have been blessed with a grandchild as well. However, I also respect the diligence and breadth of analysis conducted by the Department of State and other federal agencies in producing this environmental impact statement. The Department of State has determined the pipeline to be environmentally safe. And so I respectfully request the Department expedite the approval of the Keystone XL pipeline and grant TransCanada the Presidential Permit necessary to proceed. Pro bono publico, which is a Nebraska State Patrol motto, translated from Latin, Pro bono publico means "for the good of the public." Thank you for your time.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you.    
MS. HOBGOOD: Speaker No. 8, if you can begin by stating your name and affiliation.   
MR. BARNETT: Good afternoon. My name is Patrick Barnett. I live in Omaha, Nebraska, and my family are lifelong Nebraska residents. I'm here to speak on them, the small businesses that our family owns, and our employees. I'm here to speak on behalf of the pipeline project, and we want the State Department to issue the permit. Frankly, our family is quite appalled that this has become even an issue. At a time where we have such high unemployment, the highest in recent memory; at a time when we're embroiled in not one but three regional wars, it seems nonsensical to even be arguing this issue. You'll hear more about the economics and about the environmental studies later on this afternoon, but for our family it's become personal. As a prior service member, I can share with you that two of my prior units are on fifth deployment in seven years. Many of our cousins, and including my own brother, are currently deployed and have been for three years now; they're reservists, and they're under stop-loss. We see this as a national security issue, as an economic issue. Our service members that are deployed create a hardship within the family. This pipeline will go a long way towards alleviating that stress, and the stress that Nebraska families will feel far into the future. So we want you to keep in mind that we feel it is an economic interest of the United States, it's a security interest, to issue the permit; let's get this project done and let's get these guys back to work. Thank you.    
MS. HOBGOOD: Before I call the next number, I understand that Senator Haar is here, and I would like to give him the opportunity to speak.    
SEN. HAAR: Thank you very much. My name is Senator Ken Haar and I represent Legislative District 21 in the Nebraska Legislature. I'm on the Nebraska's Resources Committee, and the first advice I got was this: Always remember, "whiskey is for drinking and water is for fighting" and we are in a fight for our water.    TransCanada is in a fight for more profit. It's the water we drink, it's the water that enables our agricultural economy, it's the water that is more valuable than oil.    And I'd like to talk about national interest today, but also about Nebraska interest. And I think Americans today assume that when you talk about national interest, it's not coming from the top down, from Washington or Ottawa, but that's upside down, because the Keystone XL pipeline is planned to go through Nebraska, national interest starts with Nebraskans.    With all due respect to this committee, I would say today the majority of Nebraskans feel like national interest is being defined by the federal government, and TransCanada, and that you don't give a damn about Nebraska.    What I'm asking is that you move the pipeline away from the Sand Hills and the aquifer. Despite the slick feel-good commercials from TransCanada, the majority of Nebraskans clearly agree with those who booed the TransCanada commercial at the first two Cornhusker football games.    And the majority of Nebraskans agree with U.S. Senator Mike Johanns, U.S. Senator Ben Nelson, Congressman Jeff Fortenberry and Governor Heineman, who all have asked that the pipeline be rerouted around the Sand Hills and the Ogallala Aquifer.    And here's part of our concern, you see. And this comes directly from the supplemental draft EIS. That going through the current proposed pipeline corridor for 65 miles -- and this is from your report -- going through approximately 65 miles, the groundwater depth is 10 feet or less from the surface. In the Sand Hills, there are lakes that appear at times in the year; they're called wet meadows, and they're all over the place. Less than 10 feet from the surface, you drill in places -- in many places in the Sand Hills if you put a post hole in the ground, you strike water. And I may be a skeptic, but I find big holes in the Final EIS. And I'm going to name a few of those today. The fact that the State Department and TransCanada use the same independent environmental consultant, Cardno Entrix.    Quoting from the Entrix website, quote: "Keystone contracted with Cardno Entrix as the third party contractor to assist the U.S. in preparing the EIS." Sounds sort of like the fox hired his independent contractor to guard the hen house.    I frankly think that it raises real questions of integrity with the FEIS. And then you ignore a Nebraska scientist. You put one in front that says there's no problem. You ignore Dr. John Gates and Wayne Wold who have said there's insufficient scientific research for us to accurately predict how leaking oil would behave in the water- saturated Sand Hills. And these are UNL water scientists who conduct research on water flow and contamination. And then there's Dr. John Stansbury from UNL, who is a water and risk assessment expert, has concluded that the risk of catastrophic pipeline failure is far greater than TransCanada's estimate.    And by the way, in the FEIS, his conclusion is dismissed by three TransCanada staff members. So why can't the national interest and Nebraska interest work hand-in-hand, and how can that happen if Nebraska is not at the table? We need more time. And what I'm asking today is, we need more time for your decision. Why? Well, for one thing, it's only in the recent past that Nebraskans and Americans have become aware of the meaning of 'catastrophic' and 'worst case scenario.' British Petroleum in the Gulf, Fukushima Daiichi nuclear disaster in Japan, the major oil spill, a million gallons of oil spilling into the Kalamazoo River. 42,000 gallons spilling into the Yellowstone River.    There is a reason for concern. We have to be concerned about risk; it's not simply a philosophical discussion.    So since my time is running short, I would say please delay your decision -- please delay your decision --  -- and if not, please -- we will continue.  
MS. HOBGOOD: May I just ask everyone to respect each other? Thank you.    
SEN. HAAR: Thank you very much. I'll finish up right now. If more time is out of the question, then reject the pipeline altogether. But we're not giving up; we'll continue to fight for our precious water. Thank you very much.    
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker No. 9.  
MR. HEDMAN: Good morning. My name is Gary Hedman, I'm President and CEO of Southern Public Power District. I'm testifying in support of the Keystone XL pipeline.    And in doing so, I might alter my comments just a bit due to the previous speaker. But what occurs to me is that many of these people are opposed to TransCanada because they appear to be a big corporation, and we've learned in this country that you just can't trust big corporations.  They don't know them, and they fear their drinking water will become contaminated as the pipeline would leak. It's a fear, in my opinion, that just has not been justified by any scientific studies that have been conducted.  But they still don't know TransCanada, and why should we trust them with our water? In my position with Southern Power District, I've been working with various officials from this company for three years. We've had numerous face-to-face meetings about providing electric service to their pumping stations. There are four other power districts that are involved in these meetings. We have found them to be reliable, reputable; they deal with issues that we have faced in a very professional manner; they accept responsibility where and when they need to. Nebraska is kind of a rural state, and we still have something called 'your word'; and we've come to learn that their word is good. Prior to this line they built another pipeline; there were no huge protests on that pipeline; it went a little bit east of my service area, and I visited with those people over there and found that they've had the same experience; just quality throughout the construction of the pipeline. My experience even goes back about 20 years ago, when TransCanada came to me and repowered a pipeline that went from the West to the East across our state. It's been a long time ago, but that was a good experience as well, and they were a great customer. So, with knowing the company, having experience with them coupled with studies that show the pipeline is not a significant risk to our aquifer, Southern Power District's Board of Directors, all publicly-elected Board members, voted unanimously to support the project. It does go through our service area and we will be serving one of their pumping stations. Serving the pumping station will benefit all of our electric customers. All of our Board members are farmers; they are all irrigators; they all irrigate from the Ogallala Aquifer. They depend on this water for their livelihood. We serve 8,500 irrigation wells, 330,000. They're all dependent on this water source. Unlike a lot of the country right now, our economy is good. It is good because of agriculture. Corn prices and bean prices are high, and they're high and we're producing a lot of them, primarily because of irrigation. So from that standpoint, my Board is not going to take an unwarranted risk by supporting this. They were adamant enough about the positive benefits from the pipeline that at our last Board meeting they voted to write a letter to Governor Heineman, asking him to reconsider his position. We feel like we provide the power that powers the economy through agriculture, powering the irrigation wells that create that great product that turns into dollars, and the dollars into our economy. We know that we've been saying for way too long that we need to reduce our dependency on foreign oil. I can remember the first Arab oil embargo and the gas lines. This is our opportunity to do that. This is our opportunity in Nebraska to set these fears aside, consider the economic development benefits that come to our state. Look at what's in the best for the national interest. Get our people back to work, and think about what's in the national interest.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you.    
MS. HOBGOOD: Speaker No. 10.  
MR. FRIEND: Thank you, Ms. Hobgood and Mr. Stewart, thank you for being here. My name is Mike Friend. I'm a former State Senator from Northwest Omaha. I now am Director of the Nebraska Chapter of Americans for Prosperity.  Americans for Prosperity is an organization committed to promoting free market and free enterprise principles throughout the nation. For the past 14 months, varieties of activists have been doing their best to try to stop construction of the new Keystone XL pipeline here in Nebraska. Now with two hearings this week, I'm hearing from plenty of pro-economic growth and pro- growth citizens in general who are speaking out to support this opportunity to bring good-paying jobs to Nebraska and to expand our property tax base without raising the tax levy on the backs of citizens who can't afford it right now. Let's take a look at the facts. Keystone XL would expand export capacity, as some have mentioned earlier today, by over 700,000 barrels per day, allowing more oil to come from Canada to the United States. With this kind of capacity, America could safely import almost 4 million barrels of oil from Canada per day by the year 2020. That's double what we currently import from the Persian Gulf. Make no mistake, this is a once-in-a- generation opportunity to ensure energy security for generations of Americans and strengthen ties with one of America's closest allies. Without the pipeline, experts agree -- many experts agree that the free market will take this safe Canadian oil to areas like China. Foregoing construction would also mean losing $7 billion spending construction on the pipeline which would result in the creation of some 20,000 good paying job being lost, jobs America desperately needs right now, and Nebraska does, too. But the facts don't matter to some; there's a lot of misinformation out there, and most of it is to scare the public. This is not so much about the Keystone XL pipeline as it is about general opposition to fossil fuel and fossil fuel use. But the fact of the matter is, the fossil fuel use is a way of life for us in the United States right now, whether we like it or not. The pipelines are the safest way to transport this oil. But if we're going to do it by truck or by sea, do you think the protesters and certain types of activists will be out there dealing with the same subject matter in a different form? I would say yes. Some are not motivated by scientific evidence. Some are not motivated by economic reality; but motivated by ideology. As citizens, what we need to do is step back, take some deep breaths and understand what we're dealing with here. Educate ourselves to the best of our ability. Examine the scientific facts, the economic facts right now. Look at this proposal and don't be swayed by emotion. I urge my fellow Nebraskans to do exactly that; analyze it, and then come to the conclusion that I have -- by the way, I've lived in just about every corner of this state; I understand it. I know it, I feel like I know it. I think it's a common sense proposal. That's all I have. Thank you.    
MS. HOBGOOD: Speaker No. 11.  
MR. FROST: My name is Wayne Frost, I'm a rancher from --  St. Paul, Nebraska. And I think that we should move this pipeline. And the thing that I look at my fellow people back here, I think to myself: If we move the pipeline, it's about 50, 60, 70 miles longer, they will get the same amount or more work; they want jobs.    And I buy that. And I am in favor of moving this pipeline to the other side of the, out around the aquifer, going to the East part of the State; and there's a pipeline there now, and it is also had its troubles. That pipeline has had 10 or 12 leaks since they built it.    Now I don't want to look at my orange-clad fellow Americans. I think they need the jobs, I think we can get the jobs for them, and all we need is their help in getting that pipeline moved to where it ought to be.    I'm a rancher from the central part of the State, and it's along the edge of the Sand Hills; and I know that this water moves a lot further than these people are telling you whenever they say 'you spill oil, it won't move.' I know it moves. I majored in soil conservation and I'm a soil scientist from the University of Nebraska, back when I was in college, which is a lot longer than most of these people have been alive. I tell you, I appreciate what the college did for me, and things that it taught me, and it taught me that water moves. And I came from a ranch that had irrigation wells, and I've seen that water move, the drawdown of individual wells affecting the model water pump by the other wells. And we can start up our well out at the ranch, and when we first started it up, it pumped a thousand gallons a minute. When the neighbors' wells started up, which are less than a half mile to three quarters of a mile away, our water, the production would drop down to 500 to 600 gallons per minute. And water moves, underneath the soil it moves a lot. All of the rivers in the Eastern part of the State and all of the creeks in the Eastern part of the State are fed by spring-fed water. There will be water from the rains and so on, but the basic water that runs down all them creeks and rivers is water that is spring-fed from the Ogallala Aquifer. And that needs to be taken into account, because people say it don't move; it does move. And if it spills these chemically-led oils that come down from Canada, them chemicals will be in that water, it will mix in the water just as fast as your cream and sugar will mix in your coffee. So it's something that it will move, and chemicals will get in there. And TransCanada has been in the position where they won't tell you what those chemicals are. They may be severely detrimental to human health; they may kill grasshoppers, they may kill the corn when you pump that water out of the aquifer, a lot of that gets into the surface. It comes down and it's going to get in there. There's no question, and eventually we're going to have a spill, and whether we can afford to have that -- and I respectfully agree with some of the things that were said by the previous speakers, but I don't think they took into account how much that could happen if the chemicals that are in that oil get into the water; and that is a very, very severe thing that you should be considering as the Department of State, of ruining the water supply by the chemicals that are put in that oil. And you insist that TransCanada tells you what the chemicals are that are in that well.    I'm not a public speaker, and I don't know whether I've covered everything to your satisfaction, but the fact is, spring creek, it was a creek that ran through my farm, and I pumped water out of it a long time ago. Thank you.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you.    
MS. HOBGOOD: Speaker No. 12.  
MR. McCOLLISTER: Thank you and thank you for holding this hearing this afternoon. My name is John McCollister, the Executive Director of the Platte Institute for Economic Research. We are a nonprofit, nonpartisan think tank in the State. We promote individual responsibility, limited government, and free enterprise, which is the reason I am supporting this project. In an effort to secure America's energy independence from foreign exporters, there must be a viable link for America to take advantage of the growing supply of Canadian oil. TransCanada has proposed a 1700-mile expansion to the Keystone pipeline already in operation, as you know. In addition to significantly reducing our need to import oil from the Middle East, Nebraska stands to reap significant economic benefits, with more than $150 million in new tax revenues, the State will have more funds available for infrastructure projects such as road improvements, expressways and new schools. Despite significant economic energy security benefits at the national and state level, there are opponents of building a pipeline in Nebraska. Unfortunately, many of the critics are either misinformed or worse, intentionally misinforming the public in order to advance a political agenda. To be clear, many critics of the TransCanada XL pipeline are not opposed to the pipeline or its route; they're actually opposed to further development of Canadian crude oil as an American energy source. Nebraska's currently caught in the middle of an ideological fight between environmental extremism and premarket forces. The debate is not necessarily against the Keystone XL pipeline itself, but what it represents to various political factions. Consider which organizations are opposed to the pipeline and funding the campaign against it.  Sierra Club, Audubon, the Green Party, Nebraskans for Peace, and Bold Nebraska.    Nebraska is -- what these organizations have in common is a desire to end America's dependence on oil.  Special interest extremism is at the center of this debate, not the particulars of the pipeline, its route, oil sands or safety. The Green movement is assembling against the Keystone XL pipeline as one more front in the war against oil. Examples of their actions are staging sit-ins and arrests outside the White House, which requires time --    -- and resources of law enforcement paid by the taxpayers. The proposed XL pipeline incorporates new technology and the latest safety procedures, which makes transporting oil through the pipeline the safest and most energy-efficient choice. Jobs, energy security and safety are very important to Nebraskans, which is the reason I ask for you to join me in supporting the construction of the XL pipeline.    
MS. HOBGOOD: May we have the next speaker, please. Thank you.  
MR. KNUDSEN: I am Herm Knudsen, a small business owner from Ogallala, Nebraska. My house is built on the Ogallala Aquifer. Water for our home comes from a well drilled on our property. I am testifying at this hearing in support of my fellow entrepreneurs, the Keystone XL pipeline.  I am an entrepreneur. My mission is to create a new industry based on milkweed, a plant that grows wild in Nebraska. As I think about our business, I look out and I see billions of milkweed pods ready to be harvested. I look out and I see opportunities to sell milkweed in down bedding, body care and health products. Our milkweed production equipment is a 1942 John Deere combine. We evicted raccoons from the combine and dragged it out of the tree line. The now clean, highly modified combine processes milkweed pods into three valuable raw material streams. From these raw materials, we make exceptional consumer products. For 23 years, my family and I and very dedicated employees have worked diligently and persistently to achieve goals that lead to the creation of this new industry based on milkweed. We have sold equity in our company, we have borrowed a lot of money, and pledged all of our assets. Some people think we're crazy -- they may be right. Nonetheless, even people who think we are crazy shout to us: "Go for it." The people of Keystone XL pipeline are entrepreneurs, too. Their mission is to build and operate a large north/south oil pipeline. The people of Keystone XL pipeline look out and they see massive amounts of valuable crude oil in the north. They look out and they see opportunities to sell oil in the South. They look out and they see an oil pipeline; dependable, economical, secure and environmentally safe. In sharp contrast to our 1942 John Deere combine, Keystone XL production equipment is sophisticated pipeline that will cost billions of dollars in job wages for labor and in materials purchased, an effective economic stimulus package in itself. The financing of this project requires Keystone XL to raise large amounts of equity and debt. When this pipeline is complete, the people of XL will safely transport valuable oil from the north to the south. They will pay local and state taxes, and they will not disturb the land. The people of XL pipeline have successfully achieved many short term goals to bring us to the point of this hearing today. The people of XL pipeline have worked diligently and persistently to position themselves to achieve their mission to build and operate a large north-to-south oil pipeline. The people of Keystone XL pipeline are ready, willing and able to complete this enormous project. Denial of the Keystone XL application will squelch entrepreneurship. Denial will destroy, hurt and tarnish efforts to promote economic development. Denial is a wrong choice, especially in this time of recession. I believe all people in this hearing, all government regulators and all people in Nebraska should support this project and should "Go for it."    
MS. HOBGOOD: Speaker No. 14, you have the floor.  
MR. KAMINSKI: Good afternoon. My name is Ron Kaminski, and I have the privilege of serving as Business Manager for the Laborers International Union-North America, Local 1140 based in Nebraska. And on behalf of our 700 members of Laborers Local 1140, and over half a million members of our International Union, we would like to express our support for the construction of the Keystone XL pipeline. Since 2006, Local 1140 has trained hundreds of residents of Nebraska for pipeline work here in the State. We constructed both the Rockies Express natural gas pipeline and the first Keystone pipeline, which is now operational. In working on the Keystone pipeline, we worked with TransCanada. Our relationship with TransCanada is a good relationship. In this relationship they have invested in our people here in Nebraska. As a result of that relationship with the work we did on the Keystone pipeline, we were able to open up a new training facility based in Omaha, Nebraska. At this facility we plan to expand our pipeline training to include not only residents of Nebraska, South Dakota and Western Iowa, but other Midwestern states. When we worked on the Original keystone project, the process was straightforward. We all understood what we needed to do on that project; and we took care of our responsibilities. The line of communication between our union and TransCanada was open, and we accomplished construction of that pipeline without any major problems. The project was completed on time with skilled residents of the State of Nebraska. In the last few months, you've heard a lot of rhetoric about temporary jobs. All jobs in construction are temporary; it's just a matter of how temporary they are. Wind turbines. We are now in the process of building 193 wind turbines in Southwestern Iowa; all of those jobs will be completed in a six to nine month period. So every construction project is temporary. Our union took it upon ourselves here in Nebraska and made the investment here to train people from South Dakota, Western Iowa and Nebraska to do the work here in the Midwest. So we have Nebraska residents at this point in states all over the country that reside here in Nebraska; but they work on pipelines all across the country because of that training we're able to provide here in Nebraska. In other words, all these people are taxpayers of Nebraska and will continue to be. I personally, being a lifelong resident of the State of Nebraska, understand people's concerns with their land, and we care deeply about the environment. That's why our members not only build pipelines, they also build biodiesel plants, ethanol plants, and construct wind turbines and wind turbine farms. But the reality is, we are not going to be totally energy independent or without the need for fossil fuel in the next 25 years, and use of petroleum will continue to be a component of our natural energy needs. Our union is very disturbed with how TransCanada has been painted by certain environmental groups here in the State. TransCanada has been a fantastic employer and a great corporate citizen, in our eyes. We have a great relationship with TransCanada and we hope that the Keystone XL pipeline will be a great project. As TransCanada has stood by their joint labor agreement to provide members with great jobs with a great hourly wage, not only in health insurance for the employees on the project but for their families, and a penchant to look forward to when they retire. In closing, I urge the State Department, I thank you for your long look at the environmental impact of this project. I thank you for all your work you've done, and we urge you to approve the permit for the Keystone XL pipeline. Thank you.    
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker No. 15.  
MR. BAILEY: Thank you for being here today and welcome to Nebraska. My name is Britton Bailey, and I'm here on my own accord and have not been paid to testify today.    I live in Lincoln, Nebraska and I am opposed to the TransCanada Keystone XL pipeline. I agree with Nebraska Governor Heineman with regard to the Final Environmental Impact Statement. We both disagree with the analysis, and feel the XL pipeline should not cross a substantial portion of the Ogallala Aquifer. Each day we learn more about the State Department's hiring of Entrix, an oil industry- backed consulting firm who conducted the independent environmental study for the XL pipeline. This is a great concerns to Nebraskans, and leaves a bitter, oily taste in our mouths. How can we trust our drinking water to an analysis that is flawed? As Nebraskans, we demand an honest a scientific and independent analysis of this project. A trust has already been broken for the citizens of Nebraska. We have started to question the kinds of ethics that companies like TransCanada, the Alberta tar sands investors and developers follow. With TransCanada's recent attempts to rebrand itself as "ethical oil" I ask myself these questions: Is it ethical to Indigenous Canadians who are sickened and dying downstream? Is it ethical to the birds that die in the vast tailing ponds along migratory routes? Is it ethical to Nebraska land owners who are threatened into signing low dollar leases or face eminent domain for an unapproved project by a foreign country? I'm not even sure this is legal. Is it ethical for the State Department to hire Entrix, consultants for TransCanada, to conduct the independent environmental study for the XL project?  Is it ethical to conduct hearings in Nebraska to hear Nebraska's testimony so that we can be heard but allow TransCanada to bus in nonresident outsiders to speak for us? Is it a high dollar oil-ocracy or a fair and just democracy that the State Department prefers? Nebraskans are aware of TransCanada's track record with the Keystone I pipeline: 14 spills in a year of operation. We know that TransCanada is inexperienced with building tar sands pipelines. They have only one leaky tar sands pipeline under their belt. Nebraskans question TransCanada's ability to build a second people of this magnitude through the Ogallala Aquifer, the fragile Sand Hills region, and under our scenic rivers. My advice to Secretary of State Hillary Clinton and the State Department and to President Obama is to deny the XL project. We are at a historical moment where our self-inflicted dependence on oil is forcing very dangerous, very dangerous scenarios and outcomes upon us. Thank you for being here.    
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker No. 16.  
MS. BAILEY: My name is Barbara Bailey. I'm a concerned Nebraska citizen who appreciates the importance of the unique ecological treasures of the Ogallala Aquifer and the fragile Nebraska Sand Hills. I am outraged and angered by the long history of environmental degradation at the hands of greedy oil corporations.    I'm extremely disappointed in the Final Environmental Impact Statement which suggested that the proposed pipeline would have no significant impact to resources along the pipeline corridor. Recent documents obtained through the Freedom of Information Act would further indicate strong evidence of a pro-industry, biased conflict of interest. I welcome you here to our State and hope that you will listen to our concerns with open mind. From scientists and ecology advocates to landowners and His Holiness, the Dalai Lama, an ever-growing number have written and acted in protest and opposition to the TransCanada Keystone XL pipeline. Their reward is not a huge profit, but environmental and social justice.    Approval of the Keystone XL would increase greenhouse gas production, boreal forest devastation, the sacrifice to health and livelihood of indigenous nations, allow destruction of scenic roadways by mega-load equipment, increase air pollution in refinery communities, threaten wildlife, and jeopardize sustainable energy innovation. Why should Nebraskans believe the empty assurances of safety when TransCanada's own 30-inch Keystone I pipeline experienced 14 spills in the first year of operation, and their newly built Bison gas pipeline recently exploded in Northeastern Wyoming? This record speaks with an immense reality, of the enormous potential risk posed by the 36-inch Keystone XL pipeline carrying toxic and corrosive diluted bitumen at high pressure. As other major spills during the past year indicate, the pollution is impossible to clean up. It is reprehensible that the Canadian government- endorsed and subsidized oil industry is allowed to bully our landowners with threats of unauthorized eminent domain, put our drinking and irrigation water and largest fresh water aquifer in North America at risk of pollution, and threaten the fragile and unique Sand Hills ecosystem, which cannot be properly restored. All for just one reason, so that a foreign pipeline corporation and its investors can move their toxic, landlocked product to the world market for larger profits. I hope that you will have the courage and the genius to save or land, our water and our children's future from corporate greed and entitlement by denying the permit for the TransCanada Keystone XL pipeline. It is the right thing to do.    
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker No. 17.  
MS. SCHOOLEY: My name is Carol Schooley, I'm a retired teacher and a farmer. I live in Grand Island. I moved to Nebraska in 1972 from the Washington, D.C. area, and I thought I had lost civilization on the way out here. I've since come to truly appreciate the wonder that is Nebraska. It's a place of warm people and beautiful land. I wish to state my opposition to the TransCanada pipeline project. Although I oppose the project because of the environmental issues to the fragile Sand Hills lands and the aquifer, I pose it from another more telling position also: TransCanada's approach to selling themselves. TransCanada has given landowners money for their easements and then threatened those who comply with less money or eminent domain. And what about the group Landowners for Fairness who tried to negotiate a better deal with the company? They were brought together, asked to sign a paper that they would not tell what went on in their meeting, and suddenly the group has sort of disappeared. One person who went to the meeting as an interested citizen was told to leave, as he was not a member of the group. This kind of secrecy causes distressed and fractured friendships, making it easier for the company to further exploit other landowners. Is TransCanada going to give Burwell the rest of the fencing for their yearly rodeo? They bought a bunch of it for the city this year, what will they give next year after Burwell has been subdued with their largesse this year? As the company throws dollars at communities, they also pledged more than $1.1 million to support FFA. Why would a pipeline company support career development initiatives for agriculture? Are we really to believe that passage of the tar sands oils through our sacred aquifer will bring us benefits by making oil more available to Nebraskans? Are the multinational and national companies who own the tar sands going to let the U.S. have a share just because we carry the oil through our lands and waters? I believe we will have paid a price for that, with the destruction of our fragile Sand Hills and the possible ruination of our rivers. TransCanada spent $790,000 on federal lobbying just the first half of 2011. The company has spent $720,000 on lobbying, all of last year and $80,000 back in 2007 before it applied for the Keystone XL permit. If they're such a good thing for the U.S., why do they have to do so much lobbying at the federal level? On the subject of jobs, and welcome to Nebraska to all of the union folks, but I ask, why are you here? Are the jobs for Nebraska or for others?    Are we really ready to ruin the land and water of Nebraska for the few jobs that have not been specified and will probably be temporary as well as imported? Are we ready to throw away our heritage for tax dollars that expire in 15 years? And how much will this reduce farmers' taxes, especially their land taxes. How much will that money mean to our children? With the money the company has spent to convince Nebraskans through TV ads and gifts, and even invasion of beloved football team's stadium, couldn't they must move the pipeline near the one they already have and keep the mess over there?    So that it doesn't threaten the aquifer. And again, in terms of jobs, it would make a little bit more work for these folks. The tactics mentioned above I believe are underhanded and wrong, and I believe that the promises of TransCanada are empty and their attitude is one of superiority. Their purpose is to make money. A company that has to lie and lie its way into a business situation is probably not going to keep its promises and will not be such a sugar daddy when it finally gets what it wants. Because of all the above reasons, I oppose the TransCanada pipeline and urge you to, also. Thank you.    
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker No. 18.  
MR. JORDAN: My name is Harry A. Jordan. I'm married to Linda Lucille Hutchinson Jordan, whose family farm she inherited several years ago. This family farm document and title that we have is signed by General Grant. I've visited and been on the family farm for over 45 years. I visited out there and we managed it while we both taught; I taught at Craig Prep for 35 years. My wife was one of the last rural school country teachers in the countryside. She retired twice, and now we finally find ourselves retired in the City of Albion, Nebraska. Our farm is in Boone County, it's approximately nine miles north northwest of the town itself where our original homestead is, and very few miles from where the pipeline is scheduled to go through the Sand Hills. I've hunted out in the Sand Hill area for 45 years with ranchers whom we sell our crops to; our grain, our wheat. And I'm also a graduate of Cranbrook Academy as an architect and also the Maryland Institute. I've studied engineering and was an engineer in Detroit when the bottom fell out; best paying job I had. I was a union member.  
MR. JORDAN: Yes, sir.    
MR. JORDAN: And I can empathize with the Union Members that are here, and I'm going through a very emotional experience right now. A gentlemen earlier said don't get emotional. Well, when I see the union people here and I see my background, it's really a strange feeling, because I find myself torn on two sides of the fence here, but I'm not going to cross over it. I'm against, my family's against the pipe -- and let me explain. My family is against the pipeline because of unique information that we have, personal experience. I've been through the Sand Hills, and I would like to underwrite Senator Haar's comments, also, particularly as an engineer. The sand dunes move. This is an area that's 25,000 to 3 or 4 million years old. One of the remnants of this is the Missouri River. You have a depth from right on the surface all the way down to 1,000 foot deep in this particular aquifer. The remnants of this is the Sand Hills. If you drive up from Omaha, Nebraska, Council Bluffs have sand dunes, and then you look on the lee side of that and you see the dunes over there where all the Indian reservations are -- are the remnants of this great inland seat that's now deposited underground. There are areas out there in the Sand Hills where you'll get a blowout on the lee side of the apothem angle of a dune, and you'll see water on the surface which may or may not freeze in the wintertime depending upon where it's percolating up from, if it's very, very deep water. If you have a break in a pipe here, particularly sandy, loamy soil -- I don't know if anybody's ever picked up a bucket of sand, but it's about 26 pounds of just pure sand. Now add tar to that, and you drop that on top of water, when you have a freeze out here it's going to down. It's going to go down through that water and it's going to settle into the aquifer. Then it's going to flow downhill, clear to Texas. Even though the deepest spot is here. So you have, in my opinion -- and also I should say I also spent time in the Navy on three United States ships. I personally met Harry S Truman; I served in Operations Intelligence and I've dealt with Homeland Security most of my life, even after I recommended students to West Point and the Naval Academy and other services; they've all come back to me after they become officers, and I hear stories, because I shared many that I had privy to. I also reported sometime to Senator Kerry when he chaired the House Intelligence Committee, yes, ma'am. And I'm now a volunteer Rear Admiral like 147 other former servicemen from Vietnam, the Cuban blockade --    And when I was approached by the Secret Service regarding students that I had referred to, I was stunned that any -- and I'm also a Carolina boy, I was born on North Carolina, on a farm -- and my family out there lost their farm during the Depression. But I do know one thing, and from my standpoint not to differ with a fellow military colleague, the Colonel over here, but she does not know me. I'd also been part of the black program working for NASA, and built models for the Mars project research, and you can contact Senator Kerry's office and check all this out if you'd like. But if anyone types up my name, that's Harry Jordan, Harry A. Jordan -- there are four of us, I'm not trying to puff myself up here -- four of us in Omaha, I'm Harry A. Jordan. And during that time when I was a union worker, I learned a lot of things about politics. And you see American people being pitted against one another. But I would request that this distinguished State Department staff inform Secretary Clinton to advise the president to formulate the presidential finding critical to the preservation of an invaluable natural resource; and that is the largest aquifer in the world, fresh water aquifer in the world. And that is in Nebraska.    
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker No. 19.  
MR. DEFFENBACHER: My name is Ken Deffenbacher. I'm a retired scientist and teacher. I've also been a union president, twice over. I've been a resident of Nebraska for 43 years. The proposed XL tar sands pipeline is not in our national interest, and especially not in the State of Nebraska's interest, given its currently- proposed route through our Sand Hills. The principal reason it's not in our national interest is the threat of irreparable damage posed by a significant spill of XL tar sands oil in the Ogallala Aquifer and onto overlying native grass ground cover. The State Department's Final Environmental Impact Statement still lacks a proper analysis of the safety impacts of a raw tar sands oil pipeline routed through the Sand Hills, including the likelihood of spills and difficulties of cleanup. I'll give several examples. In the first year of operation of Keystone I, in both the U.S. and Canada there have been 30 spills, or more. TransCanada's new natural gas pipeline exploded in a Northwest section of Wyoming earlier this summer, after less than six months of operation. They had said it was the safest ever, because the best technology had been used. TransCanada's Canadian competitor, Enbridge company, had a pipeline transporting tar sands crude oil, burst in July of 2010 and spilled 880,000 gallons into the Kalamazoo River in Michigan.  The EPA gave Enbridge two months to clean it up. More than a year later, much of the oil along a 40 mile strip of river hasn't been cleaned up because the tar sands crude is sticking to rocks and sand at the bottom of rivers, lakes and wetlands. EPA scientists don't now when it will be cleaned up, if ever. No one seems to know how to do so. The Sand Hills aquifer can be very mobile, especially in Holt County, in Northern Nebraska. Outcropping into ponds, wetlands and springs, they create lakes and rivers. Much of the Platte River east of Columbus is fed by ground water of Sand Hills origin. Of course Lincoln and Omaha depend on water wells along the Platte to a considerable extent. Thus, contamination of a particular mobile portion of the Sand Hills aquifer could result in a threat to the water supply for many Nebraskans. The State Department environmental consulting firm confidently concluded that the grass cover of the Sand Hills can be reclaimed after skimming it off for construction. If this firm, having had TransCanada as one of its major clients, had thoroughly researched the problem, they would know that reclaiming grass cover in the Sand Hills is a very iffy proposition, even their four year time window. I had a noted prairie ecologist the other day say "Good luck with the four year time window." Thus, wherever reclamation is unsuccessful, highly likely with warmer than normal dry springs or summers, there will be an environmental scar and the possibility of a blowout of the exposed sandy soil. Such blowouts would not do much for pipeline stability, and likely result in a frequent shutdown of the pipeline, whether it would spring a leak or not. In conclusion, if I were a TransCanada shareholder, I would have some serious concerns about the Sand Hills. I would be in favor of them at the Nebraska border, with the proposed existing route, taking a sharp jog to the east and extending down the existing route of the Keystone I pipeline. Thank you.    
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker No. 20.  
MS. DEFFENBACHER: My name is Helen Deffenbacher, and I'm a grandmother and an environmental activist. I've lived in Nebraska 43 years. Like our vocal heroes here today who continue to fight the good fight against tar sands oil, the First Nations people of British Columbia are also inspiring. They're standing up to TransCanada's sister corporation, Enbridge. They have refused Enbridge's offer of $1 billion to build the proposed Northern Gateway Pipeline across their land. The First Nations people know they can't drink oil or grow crops on contaminated soil any more than we can. They also know that $1 billion would not even begin to cover what they've been asked to risk. "Enbridge's money is no good to us," they have said. Passing down the livable earth to coming generations is the kind of legacy that means the most to them. It's also the kind that is most meaningful to many others here today. TransCanada's money would be no good to us, either, without clean water to drink and to grow our crops.    Our government is of, by and for the people; not of, by and for corporations, as many have believed it has become --    We must stand for all of the people, not just for the wealthy only or the arrogant only. It is arrogant of TransCanada to refuse to change the pipeline route merely because it would be less expensive than alternative routes; and it is arrogant for them to dismiss the value of the Ogallala Aquifer to our nation when calculating what they would save. What price can they or anyone else put on an aquifer? It is arrogant for them to claim the pipeline is in our national interest when we know U.S. demand for oil is dropping. It is arrogant of TransCanada to inflate the number of jobs to people who need the work. Most of the jobs are temporary, and they are 13 times the U.S. Department of State estimates. The proposed pipeline, however, would be permanent. In its first year of operation, Keystone I has already leaked over 30 times in the U.S. and Canada, and so it appears it would be a matter of if, not when Keystone XL would begin to leak. The EPA recently reported that it would take many years to complete the cleanup of the Kalamazoo River Watershed primarily because tar sands oil is heavier than water and contains toxic metals.  An aquifer is not a river, and no one has ever cleaned one up before or tried to restore an aquifer following a mega-spill. What our state and our nation desperately need are leaders with foresight, wisdom and courage of the First Nations people of British Columbia, leaders who believe that our water and land are more valuable than oil, or any amount of money and our people worth protecting. I respectfully ask you, Secretary Clinton, to be that kind of leader and to move our nation forward, not backward. Thank you.    
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. We now have Speaker No. 21.  
MISS WILSON: My name is Della Wilson, and I am a 12 year old eighth grader from Logan Fontenelle Middle School in Bellevue, Nebraska.    I am a second generation native of Nebraska. This past April, I had the privilege of winning first place in energy science in the Nebraska Science Olympiad State Championship, and that's why I came here today.    I've been studying the ways to protect our earth's waterways. I am here today to ask for your support in protecting the Ogallala Aquifer I realize that the issue of the pipeline and the aquifer is complicated. I know that our nation thrives off oil and jobs, and that the promise of both from the people is one that is hard to pass up. But XL has a pass history of leakage. Even one leak in our shell aquifer can ruin this natural water resource that provides water to millions of people in eight states. I studied the cost of restoration, and it's a lot. And sometimes the aquifer can't be cleaned up at all. Many of you have political reasons for being here. You belong to a side; an environmentalist, a pro-oil person, a Democrat, a Republican and so on. At 12 years old, I don't belong to a clique or a party, but I believe this is wrong. This aquifer was placed here millions of years ago for our use and we have an obligation to be good stewards of it. Trading clean water and jobs may seem like a good idea to you, and many of you are at an age where you won't be around to feel the effects of this decision -- but your decision will affect me and my children and my grandchildren. Why will we compromise or natural water and not find other methods to produce oil? And we may not even benefit from this oil this pipeline will produce anyways. Why are we doing this? I came here today because I know will cause a negative problem if it's done, even to our nation's economy. According to the Water Earth Project, over one billion people on this earth struggle to find clean, safe water. Oil and jobs are important, but they are not required to sustain life. Clean water is. Don't sacrifice it and cause me and my generation to have to bear the consequences in the future and join the billions of others who are struggling to find safe water. President Obama, please vote no for the pipeline and yes for clean water for Nebraska and our neighboring states. Please, save your children and grandchildren because they will remember your choice. Thank you for your time.    
MS. HOBGOOD: We'll next have Speaker No.  
MS. RICHTER: Good afternoon. My name is Ruth Richter. I'm 50 years old and except for 15 years of living in California, I've grown up in Bellevue, Nebraska. And I moved back here in 2005 with my husband and my two boys to raise my children's great state. Two years ago our city council elected to start a Green Committee, and I am founding member of what is now a nonprofit 501 organization called Green Bellevue. We promote protection of the environment through education. Even though this issue of the construction and path of TransCanada's Keystone XL pipeline in Nebraska does not directly go through Bellevue, the members of Green Bellevue and our Board of Directors do believe that the project poses great risks to the environment and economy in Nebraska and in America, and that affects all of us. We believe that in order to protect the over $17.2 billion in agricultural industry in Nebraska, clean water resources need to be protected. We feel that the environmental impact statement that has given the green light environmentally to the pipeline project can be compared to allowing your child to swim in shark-infested waters because the statistics of getting attacked by a shark are less then getting struck by lightning. Per John Stansbury, Associate Professor and Associate Chair of Environmental Water Resources Engineering at UNL, the number of leaks and the amount of the leaks would be greater than estimated by TransCanada; and the drinking water of the entire state could be at risk from this pipeline. It is not a matter of if it will leak, but when it will leak. And there are 12 known leaks on the existing pipeline. This pipeline project has the potential to benefit Nebraska in the short term by providing dollars to businesses and jobs to our people; and also some will benefit by receiving some tax moneys and other types of payments. However, pipeline leaks of tar sands oil and whatever known chemicals could result in contamination of water for irrigation, livestock and drinking, and could also lead to the loss of a great number of agricultural sector jobs in the long term. Above all, it is impossible to put a price on what could be lost from drinking poisoned water and on the enduring health risks that a spill would pose. It should not be argued that this pipeline would contribute to our energy security. This is because, once these tar sands are refined, there is no guarantee that the final product will be purchased for use by Americans.    And allowing TransCanada to put the pipeline through the United States doesn't necessarily mean bettering our relationship with Canada or enabling us to cut ties with the Middle East. The efforts to increase job creation would better be spent on developing alternative energies in Nebraska.    These cleaner technologies would not put human lives and livelihoods at risk, and would pose a much smaller risk to the environment. Therefore, Green Bellevue believes the Presidential Permit for this additional TransCanada pipeline should not be approved. TransCanada is using their best guess when it comes to safety of the pipeline material. Effectiveness of methods to clean up potential spills and restore clean water, as well as the proposed monitoring equipment. It is not a matter of if it will leak but when it will leak, and there are 12 known leaks on the existing pipeline. The economic gain potential is simply not large enough for the risks we are being asked to take; and therefore, on behalf of the members of Green Bellevue, we are asking President Obama to decline the permit to build this pipeline.    
MS. HOBGOOD: Speaker No. 23.  
MR. PRYMET: Thank you for allowing us to speak today. My name is Dan Prymet, and we speak in favor of the pipeline. I work for Laborers-Employers Cooperation Education Trust, LECET for short. We are a labor-management cooperation committee. We cover the States of Nebraska, South Dakota and Iowa. We are labor and management working together to fight for projects that will put our members to work, and making a living wage. This pipeline will put thousands of our members to work, many of them who have been unemployed and without work for a long time. Our members and contractors working together have made a commitment to providing the best trained and safest workforce for this project through state-of-the-art, first class training facilities. We are here today to fight for good jobs that will put our members and our contractors back to work, and this project will do that. Thank you.    
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker No. 24.  
MR. PICKARD: Thank you for allowing me to speak today. My name is Lynn Pickard, I'm the training director for the Iowa Labor, Education and Training Fund. We help provide the training for our members across Nebraska, South Dakota and Iowa. We also helped set up the state-of-the-art training center in Omaha, Nebraska, and we've trained hundreds of our members using our nationally recognized pipeline safety curriculum. The pipeline course teaches our participants the safety procedures and work practices required to work on the pipeline construction projects. All the phases of pipeline construction are addressed, including the front end, the pipe handling, the pipe coding, and the back end of the work, to its original condition. I urge the State Department to approve the permit. Thank you.    
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker No. 25.  
MS. LAWSON: Thank you. My name is Pippa White Lawson, and I'm a concerned Nebraskan. In January of this year, I attended a meeting about the XL pipeline. There was a gentleman there from South Dakota who said TransCanada told South Dakotans that there would be 11,000 jobs for them on the first pipeline. They got 200. When Nebraskans are promised thousands of jobs, I fear it may be a repeat of what happened in South Dakota. But in today's economy, even a few jobs count. However, if there is a leak in the XL pipeline, the jobs of hundreds of Nebraskans in agriculture are threatened. So though I understand that many people need jobs, they may get jobs that ultimately ruin the livelihood permanently of ranchers and farmers here. How is this in the national interest?    Unless there is a new national interest that doesn't include the people who provide us with food.    With regard to the possibility of a leak, the State Department has said in its Final Environmental Impact Statement that the XL pipeline would have a degree of safety greater than any typically-constructed domestic oil pipeline system under current regulations. This sounds very reassuring, but if TransCanada had that technology, why didn't they use it on the first pipeline?    They cannot have wanted the embarrassment of those 12 to 14 leaks in 12 months. If they have that technology, it is not tried and true, it is new. So this degree of safety is all conjecture; it's hopeful conjecture. It should be safe, but wouldn't you have said that about the first pipeline? I feel that Nebraskans' intelligence is insulted when we get assurances that are based on nothing but hope and should -- 'it should be safe.'    There is no precedent. This is new technology, and it's not proven or it would have been used on the first pipeline. And these assurances are empty and they're not enough when you're talking about the risk of an oil spill in a water supply of millions of people, crops and livestock. We Nebraskans deserve better from our State Department than those assurances.    
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker No. 26.  
MR. WALTON: Thank you for having us this morning; my name is Rex Walton, I'm from Lincoln, Nebraska. I suppose most of us, if we had been here for the first hour or so and listened to the first ten or twelve speakers, we would think that perhaps overwhelmingly that Nebraska was in favor of this XL pipeline. Ken Haar was allowed to speak; I appreciate that. But most of the first ten speakers evidently were given free passes to speak first.    They were not in line. I was in line for an hour and a half, and some of those people I did not see in front of me.    We have a fellow here in the State, his name is Joe Sterito; he wrote a book called "I Am A Man" about Chief Standing Bear, and the trial of Standing Bear. What does that have to do with us? It was a trial that brought a confluence of events together that for that for the first time declared the American Indian as a person in the eyes of the court, so that they could petition the court in a matter of legal precedent. That may sound superfluous here, but what we're talking about is making sure that all of us have an equal standing, whether we're union members here waiting in line to speak, or whether we're people that are union members such as myself, and still opposed to the pipeline. That's something that we need to keep important.    All of us need an equal standing under the law and under the eyes of this procedure. The pipeline project is important to Nebraska for many reasons. Some of these reasons are frightening to me. What happens with that oil? Who owns that oil? We see the pipeline being debated. The oil project is invested in by many companies and many nations. That oil will be owned by many nations, China among them. What happens when we decide, in the United States or Canada decides as a government that that oil needs to stay here. Will it still flow or will it stay here, where we supposedly need it for our national security. These are very important questions, and I submit that we need to stop, hold back, move the pipeline; let's take a little time here and look at the procedure, see what we need to do. Think about the average person out here that wants a job, that wants a life, that wants pure and clean water. Let's keep these things in mind. Thank you for your time.    
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Before I call the next number I understand we have another elected official here, Senator Fulton. If you can some and speak.  
SEN FULTON: Thank you. My name is Tony Fulton, I represent District 29 in the Nebraska Legislature. Well, welcome to Nebraska. I've been on the other end of these hearings, and I can understand that sometimes it's hard to pay attention for long periods of time; but I simply ask you to pay heed to the people of Nebraska, for in them I believe resides a great deal of wisdom, and pay heed to the land of Nebraska, particularly the Sand Hills, for there is no other place on earth like it.    The position I'm espousing here, I'd like the route of this pipeline to be moved, and to that end I would like to see the permit denied.    Now, there have been good reasons given in favor of this pipeline, and I have to say that if I were asked whether I'm in favor of this pipeline, I would say that I am. There will be jobs, and certainly I understand the people who are dressed in orange are here for the jobs. And in these trying economic times, brother, I hear you. They want jobs for their families, and we want jobs for Nebraskans. And to that end, I'm thankful for this pipeline. We'd like to see our energy sources come from friends rather than from enemies, and certainly Canada is a friend. I recognize that and I support it, and therefore I'm grateful for this pipeline. There's also this reality I've not heard mentioned yet, and that is revenues that will come to our great state. Canadian dollars paying Nebraska taxes? I'm all in favor of that. I'm thankful, therefore, for this pipeline. I simply have concern with this route; and the way that state and federal governments interact, here's an opportunity and I feel an obligation and responsibility, to ask you to deny this permit. There's something that's important to point out, and that is that TransCanada has a position; they are the prime mover of this project. This is not to impugn their engineers or scientists, but what I am going to say is that they are going to advocate for this route. They're going to say that it is safe, that it's been engineered. And again, they may well believe that, but recognize that there are different positions in this debate, and that it is the responsibility of elected officials and public officials, indeed, to ferret out that which is true from which is not true, and to recognize the good intentions and what the people want. Now I first took note of this issue when I read in our local newspaper that TransCanada was proposing to operate this pipeline at a higher pressure while simultaneously building the pipe with thinner -- with less pipe, with thinner wall thickness. My own background personally is in the engineering profession, indeed in the energy sector, working with oil and gas companies. And this put off a red flag in my mind, this was about a year ago, and I think I was like a number of Nebraskans, content to allow this to play out. I figured, if you're going to operate at a higher pressure with low or minimal thickness in your pipe, someone's going to raise a red flag. Indeed, no one did. And so I fired off a letter to Secretary Clinton and I asked to speak with TransCanada's engineers; and to their credit, they allowed me that opportunity,. Now they never did go forward with that proposal. Here is an example of science and sound engineering recognizing and yielding to prudence, as a show of deference and respect to the alarm and concern of the people. I'm certain that there was good, sound engineering reason to propose higher pressures with thinner pipe. Indeed, the engineers I spoke to indicated that this would be fine. Yet that proposal was abandoned, I presume out of deference and respect to the concern of the people. President Obama, Secretary Clinton, please hear the sincere and genuine concern of an entire people. The place between extremes, that elusive middle ground in politics. The path of prudence does not pass through the Nebraska Sand Hills.    Out of respect for time and respect of the time of others, I simply ask that this permit be denied such that the route of this pipeline may be reconsidered. Thank you.    
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker No. 27.  
MS. ADAMS: That's a hard speech to follow. My name is Fern Adams, and I am here to --  I'm from Lincoln, Nebraska, and I'm here to represent the senior citizens that I know and are certainly against this pipeline running through our aquifer into our Sand Hills. Years ago I worked for the groundwater branch of the U.S. Geological Survey, and it was at that time I learned the value of the Ogallala Aquifer in the State of Nebraska. I could speak many reasons why this pipeline should not be built; some of them have already been addressed. But instead, after reading our morning paper, it appears all our union workers, most of the people all want clean water, clean air, and jobs. We all so. In Nebraska we cannot feel safe to choose all three of these as equal. We must at least beg, if we have to, to have the pipeline rerouted around our Sand Hills and Ogallala Aquifer. We cannot be forced into a position that could possibly destroy our irrigation and water supplies in our State. Also, we might lose the ability to produce crops for the nation and the world. In our State we can't settle for a promise of a few dollars in the pocket today. President Obama, please save our State for us.    
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker No. 28.  
MS. MILLER: My name is Cheryl Miller, and I'm from Merrick County, or Central City area of Nebraska. The last two speakers have made my speech feel a little more difficult, in my mind. I am standing here in support of the pipeline. I am from Nebraska, from Kimball, Nebraska originally; and that has given me part of my feeling in supporting this, because I grew up during the time when the 12-year old spoke -- I was 12 years old when the missile silos came to Western Nebraska. And the scare was just like this -- "Oaah! We're going to blow up. We're going to lose the western end of the state!" So I kind of see some of the fear thing going on here. But I have great respect for Senator Tony Fulton and his comments regarding the engineering part of the aquifer and the pipeline gave me a little bit of concern, more concern than I had. But I do support the pipeline being here. I live in Merrick County, right where it will be. I am concerned about our water, I am concerned about the big aquifer under our State, but I would like to see it be safe. I read Senator Christensen of Imperial, sent a letter, had 57 additional safety requirements placed on TransCanada. His response was: All those 57 demands were met to his satisfaction on the pipeline. That made me support it. So you have a very difficult decision, I know, to make on this issue, because I'm waffling. I do support it, I think it would be very good for our State, very good for my County, and I wish you well in your decision, as I waffle. If that makes any sense. Thank you.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you.    
MS. HOBGOOD: Speaker No. 29.  
MR. SCHROPFER: Good afternoon. My name is Len Schropfer, I'm a farmer in Filmore County, and we do thank you for this hearing. Shame on TransCanada, threatening and silencing landowners, preventing them from answering questions from state senators. Buying off officials and the media, using grossly exaggerated jobs claims. TransCanada Pipeline's operations director, Jim Kraus, has said to our legislature that the XL pipeline could be used to mine or transport water. Since water will become more valuable than petroleum, that would help explain TransCanada's insistence on routing through the headwaters of the Ogallala Aquifer.    Secretary Clinton has said that the importance of groundwater to our State is only one of her many national interest concerns, which include economic and energy security. The net beneficiary of this population would be China, since they control a lot of refinery capacity and the Panama Canal. Therefore, it is certainly not in our national interest. It would not lower our gas prices but raise them, by bypassing Midwest refineries.    We should instead get more petroleum from our good neighbor Mexico, much closer, and from safe wells in the Gulf of Mexico, and for productive capped wells in Texas and other states. Please deny this permit. Thank you.    
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker No. 30.  
MR. BLASINGAME: I'm John Blasingame, I'm a retired member of Local 1140 in Omaha, Nebraska, Laborers International Union of North America. Listening to some of the speakers before me, you know, I own a good mule, and I like riding my mule. Maybe I ought to get rid of my car and just stick to the mule. She pollutes a little bit, but I can live with it.  Maybe we ought to all get rid of our cars and just get mules. Well, we're not going that way. Like it or not, we are wed to fossil fuels, and I dare say that at least 99 percent of us at this meeting today got here through the use of fossil fuels. They are a fact.    Cars don't run on sunshine; it's too bad, but that's a fact, too. What we need, in my union, are jobs, desperately. And you can't believe how desperately. And this pipe, this pipeline, will be built paying a living wage, not a minimum wage. It will help people pay rent, make house payments; it will give their whole families, the workers and their families, good health insurance. Our workers will pay into a good union pension plan; that's a defined benefit plan, not a 401. Most American workers used to be covered by this kind of plan, not anymore. But we still are, and it works; it's really good. It will create demand for services. We hear that giving tax breaks to corporate America makes for -- that will create jobs. No. It's demand, it's money in working people's pockets that create demand for goods and services that makes the economy go. And on top of that, we're going to be paying a lot of taxes into our local, state and federal treasuries out of those wages we'll be earning. It's good for us, very much. I think it's impossible to get fossil fuels into the tanks of our automobiles without some kind of accidents. If you don't like the pipeline, then I assume that you're willing to take tragedies like the Exxon Valdez, that that's acceptable. Or the blowout in the Gulf of Mexico is acceptable -- because these things are going to happen; the oil is going to get to this country some way, and there are going to be accidents, and you can't prevent them all. This is a good idea, I think, for this pipeline to come this way because Canada is a good neighbor, and if we don't buy the oil, that doesn't mean that Alberta is not going to exploit those tar sands; they definitely will. So you're not keeping, you're not helping any kind of environmental condition in Canada by not taking their oil. We need these jobs badly, and I hope we can get this pipeline built. Thank you.    
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. And if, after Speaker 31, if we can take just a very, very short break for our reporter, I'd greatly appreciate it. Speaker No. 31.  
MR. MILLER: My name is Marty Miller, and I'm a landowner very near the proposed pipeline. I live near Central City. We really need the jobs out there. We need the business that the pipeline would bring, there'd be a pumping station there, and heaven knows we certainly could use the oil that isn't coming from the Far East. So I'm for the proposed pipeline. Thank you.    
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. And again, we'll just take a very short, five minute break.   
MS. HOBGOOD: You can start from the beginning.  
DR. McKINNEY: My name is Dr. Amanda McKinney, and I'm a physician from Beatrice, Nebraska. I stand before you today not only as a physician but as a mother and a concerned citizen. In October 2009, I literally stood on stage behind President Obama in support of health care reform. Today I say that if this administration cares about the health of its people, then it must stop this pipeline.    These are the things we know: We cannot afford a spill of this toxic tar sands oil into our soil or our drinking water. The production of this oil requires one billion cubic feet of natural gas per day, and so carbon dioxide emissions from tar sands are 20 percent higher than from other oil sources. This only worsens our climate change issues. According to TransCanada's own permit application, this oil will remove the oversupply of Canadian crude, thereby increasing the price of heavy crude to the equivalent cost of imported crude. This will not lower our gas prices. This is an export pipeline with oil destined for Europe and Latin America.    According to TransCanada's own data, only 11 percent of construction jobs of the Keystone I pipeline in South Dakota went to South Dakota natives. And TransCanada's 2008 permit application only estimated a peak workforce of 3500 to 4200 construction personnel to build the pipeline. These jobs are temporary and they will make little impact on our job crisis.    The Amalgamated Transit Union and the Transport Workers Union are on record as being in agreement with this. I am wholeheartedly for union workers and union jobs, but their skills would be better utilized building wind turbines and solar panels.    This is an abbreviated list of the negatives, and the positives of building this pipeline are nearly nonexistent. It serves only to line the pockets of TransCanada. I leave you today with a Cree Indian prophecy: Only when the last tree has been cut down, only when the last river has been poisoned, only when the last fish has been caught, only then will you find that money cannot be eaten.    
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker No. 33.  
MS. WATTERS: Hi, my name is Cindy Watters, and I'm just a Lincolonite and I've lived here all my life. And it's not if it's going to leak, it's when. There is not enough money in the world to repair the adverse health, economic or environmental cost. This would not only affect us but the world. Please save America's aquifer. Thank you.    
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker No. 34.  
MR. PILGREEN: Hello, my name is Wade Pilgreen. I am a 31-year member of Pipeliners Local Union 798. But first of all, I am an American. I have worked on several pipeline projects across this country. I have seen this industry grow by leaps and bounds in the safety and environmental areas. I also share the concerns of everyone in this room and across the country about the safety and environmental issues of the Keystone XL pipeline. But I do fl TransCanada will do everything possible, such as use the most qualified personnel such as the welders, laborers, and operators represented in this room. And also, they will use the most advanced materials in the construction of this pipeline. I know without a doubt it is in their best interest to build and maintain this pipeline with state-of-the- art technology and to treat the public as well as landowners with respect and dignity. I would like to take a moment and express my feelings on why we need this pipeline so desperately. The number one reason is to stop buying oil from nations that do not have the best interests of Americans at heart; and to stop the transfer of wealth to the OPEC countries. This will create several thousand jobs, real jobs for the American workers. While I do believe we need all the alternative energy sources that the environmentalists are saying we need, but at this time we're not far enough along in these resources to provide this nation those alternatives only. We still depend on oil. I know the Midwest is deeply rooted in farm and families, as I grew up doing just that. We used oil products on a daily if not hourly basis; diesel to run our tractors, oil and grease to lube our equipment, and fuel to drive to get supplies and to heat our home. This pipeline will provide another avenue for the United States to have more of these products. The more the supply, the lower the prices. I truly before this pipeline will be a huge impact in getting the U.S. economy back on the right track by creating several thousand jobs. On the safety of oil pipelines in general, there are currently 55,000 miles of crude oil pipelines in America. Saying that, there are very few incidents for that many miles of pipeline in production. Pipelines are the number one safest way to transport products in America. Also, the U.S. State Department has done an extensive study on the impact of this pipeline to the environment, and have found there to be no significant impact to our environment. And I have heard TransCanada say their goal is to build and maintain their pipelines without one single incident. And I am strongly in favor of the Keystone XL pipeline and feel they are committed to doing just that. I appreciate your time on this very important matter.    
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker No. 35.  
MR. BARNETT: Good afternoon. My name is David Barnett and I'm an elected representative of the Pipeliners Local Union 798 of the United Association. I want to take this opportunity to thank you for allowing me to speak today. I would first like to say that I consider myself to be an environmentalist, not an environmental extremist. I truly believe in treating our environment around us with the utmost respect and consideration. I fully support the extensive environmental studies that have been performed for the Keystone XL pipeline project. And further support their findings that this project will have minimal impact to the environment. We are here to weigh out the environmental impact as well as the public need for this project. I've spent my life in the pipeline construction field, and would say that I have as much hands-on experience in constructing pipelines as anyone in this room. The largest project in which I was personally involved was the construction of the trans-Alaska pipeline project. This project came up against much opposition from the environmental groups of that day. These environmental groups made lots of predictions back then. I recall one such as, "Caribou would not survive around the pipeline." Yet today I see pictures that indicate that it is the grazing area of their choice. Pipelines are the safest and most environmentally-favorable way to transport oil and petroleum products. The trans-Alaska pipeline has safely transported approximately 16 billion barrels of oil to date, with no major disasters and no major impact on wildlife or the tundra. While I'm on that subject, I'd like to set the record straight for some of the fear tactics we've heard today. Of the 12 to 14 or 18 leaks that we heard called on here today of the original Keystone, none of those leaks were in the actual pipeline; they were in the pumping stations. That pipeline has not failed, and my members built a quality pipeline for TransCanada.    I have personally consulted with experts on this Ogallala Aquifer. It's another fear that I understand that the local individuals have. With the experts that we have consulted with, I do not believe for a moment that the Ogallala Aquifer, with all the precautions TransCanada has taken, including reducing the pressure less than any other pipeline is being operated in in this country today is in any real danger of contamination by this pipeline. I currently represent 6800 pipeline constructors who are the most highly trained, highly skilled welders, pipefitters, and pipeline helpers in the world. Some of these pipeline workers that I'm speaking of reside right here in this area, and are probably some of your neighbors. The TransCanada Corporation is committed to using the highly skilled work force to construct the Keystone XL pipeline through your state. Why did they choose the highest quality contractors in the world for this project? Not because they were the cheapest contractors, but because they were the best contractors. The best at doing the right-of-way, the best at developing good relationships with the landowners, and the best contractors available for the end result of minimal impact to the environment. Might I add that by choosing these contractors and this work force, it will also raise the bar for the level of public safety in the area of the pipeline. While we're on the subject of public safety, I feel as many Americans do that we need to purchase as much of our oil as we can from our friendly Canadian allies to the north. As we now know, some of the oil money that has been spent overseas in the past has come back to reign terror on our great country and its citizens. In my opinion, and as I am sure all of you would agree, that too is a matter of public safety. I want to give you a figure right now that is going to astound you: We spend a million dollars a minute on overseas oil. How can we possibly win a war when we're funding both sides of it? And do not kid yourself, it's over the oil. This project is estimated to create 13,000 construction jobs, many of which will go to my members. And 118,000 additional jobs in other related sectors, many of which will be right from this State. This comes at a time when America needs jobs badly, maybe as badly as it has in 75 years. This project will pump over $10 billion of private equity investment into our country, and it is much needed. The best estimates are that this project will create $600 million in revenue for communities and states along the pipeline route during construction, which is also much needed. I, too, desire for America to develop more green technology and implement it into our lives. This will not happen overnight; and as I stand here today, America has a large dependency on oil for many uses. We all came here today in some form of transportation, and I would bet that an oil product propelled all of us here. As I have previously stated, the studies have been performed. With the proper planning and construction, the overwhelming need for this project far outweighs the minimal impact to the environment. I stand in favor of the State Department permit to allow the construction of the Keystone XL pipeline, and let's show the world America can still make a common sense decision!    
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker No. 36.  
MR. McCOLLEY: My name is Mark McColley, I'm the business manager of Steamfitters and Plumbers Local Union 464 in Omaha, Nebraska. I'd like to thank you for allowing me to address this hearing. I represent over 340,000 members of the United Association of Plumbers, Pipefitters, Sprinkler Fitters, along with their families. The UA, as my organization is known by its highly trained craftsmen and women who build everything from homes, schools, and hospitals, to power plants, manufacturing facilities. Our members will be constructing the Keystone XL pipeline. The pipeline is an environmentally safe project that will go a long way towards increasing our security and energy independence. It will also create tens of thousands, perhaps even hundreds of thousands of badly needed jobs, when unemployment in the construction industry remains at 40 percent. I am confident in saying that the project will be environmentally safe, because I understand the comprehensive and thorough review undertaken by the U.S. State Department. The Environmental Impact Statement concluded that Keystone would have no significant impact on the environment. As you have no doubt hear, pipelines are the safest and most reliable way to transport oil. It makes complete sense to construct the Keystone pipeline to transport oil from our oil sands to refineries in the U.S. We need this oil, our dependence on the Middle Eastern oil that made us vulnerable; and now we have an opportunity to purchase crude oil from our nearest and closest ally. It makes no sense whatsoever to let this oil go elsewhere. Much of the opposition to this oil is based on misinformation. For instance, there are persistent claims that oil and gas exploration in Alberta is damaging the environment in that region. But the report of the Royal Society of Canada found no evidence that surface waters were being polluted by the industry there. The report also noted that greenhouse gas emissions from the oil sands make up about 5 percent of Canada's total emissions, compared to 16 percent for fossil fuel power generation and 27 percent for transportation. In terms of global emissions, the oil sands contributes 0.8 percent of the greenhouse gases worldwide. In fact, failure to approve Keystone could actually increase greenhouse emissions, because importing refined oil from the Middle East and elsewhere creates a much larger carbon footprint than the pipeline from Canada does. It is also important to note, according to the State Department's environmental impact study, no sole source of aquifers, or aquifers serving as the principal source of drinking water for an area are crossed by the proposed pipeline. The Department also determined that because of special conditions imposed on Keystone, the project would have a degree of safety greater than typically-constructed domestic oil pipeline systems. Oil from Canada oil sands will without a doubt lessen our dependence on Middle Eastern oil. The International Energy Agency has noted that Canadian oil sands represents one of the few growth areas among non-OPEC countries. The Agency also notes that Canada's proven oil reserves ranks third behind Saudia Arabia and Venezuela. Keystone capacity could eventually account for an amount equivalent to nearly half of the Persian Gulf imports. We need only look to the recent past to be reminded that more secure oil supplies as well as increased supplies have led to a drop in prices at the gas pump. Finally, during this time of serious national recession, the jobs created by the Keystone project are substantial and should be part of any decision made on this project. The project should be approved now. Thank you.    
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker No. 37.  
MR. SIMPSON: Thank you for allowing me the opportunity to speak. My name is Dane Simpson, I'm a member of the Laborers International Union of North America, and I'm also a member of the National Alliance for Fair Contracting. The National Alliance for Fair Contracting is an advocate for safe, qualified, good-paying jobs. We're there to ensure a fair, level playing field in the construction industry. But what I've heard today is people that support this project but want it rerouted and need more time. What I'd like to say is that when a construction worker has bills piling up, do they get more time? When a construction worker can't pay their mortgage, do the get more time? When the credit card companies are sending you letters between you're delinquent in your payments, do you get more time? I know there's a lot of people in this audience that are college students, and they're going to have college loans piling up soon. They're not going to get more time, either. That's why we can't wait for these construction jobs; we need jobs now.    Please grant this permit and let us go to work. Thank you.    
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker No. 38.  
MS. LEACH: My name is Ruth Leach, I'm a lifelong resident of Nebraska, but I'm not necessarily only thinking about Nebraska. They've said almost everything today that I had on my paper to say, on the people that were for moving the pipeline route, and I was all for Heineman, when he said that I was thrilled. And I thought, "Is anybody in Washington paying any attention at all to what this is saying? Do they really know that there is no perfect thing made by human man? There's nothing ever made that won't leak."    So we have to go on 'when it leaks on the current route.' I'm sure you all know exactly what the aquifer is and what it will do. But do you have any idea how big that is, the aquifer? It is -- let me look because I don't remember numbers well -- It is 174,000 square miles. It's not just Nebraska, it's over South Dakota, it's over Oklahoma, and it's over Texas. It's not just those states, either. The things that we have smaller places where it's over smaller areas, and that New Mexico and so forth, Colorado, New Mexico. Smaller areas. It doesn't just affect Nebraska. It doesn't just affect these eight states. It affects you in Washington, D.C. 82 percent of the groundwater drank in the United States -- not Nebraska, the United States -- is furnished by the Ogallala Aquifer.    Thirty percent of the irrigated land that's irrigated by ground water, we're not talking about rivers -- and heaven knows, we've had enough rivers around here -- but it's over the whole United States that uses this. Not to mention the wheat and the corn and the stakes that the corn fed, they're done by the irrigation that is there. We're talking about a major food source. We're talking about a major source for the United States. You wanted to know what it had to do with the entire country? That I had to say, that's what it has to do with the entire country. The next thing to say that hasn't been said already, after we know now that's going to leak, that oil pipe is going to leak. There is a legal precedent for protecting this Ogallala Aquifer. In 1980, a Texas farmer won his battle with the nuclear waste dump with only a possible chance of getting the Ogallala Aquifer. If you'd go ahead and go with this pipeline, because I feel sorry for the people -- well, these guys don't work in Nebraska, but they work in the United States, and I want them to have jobs. I'm not sure about pipelines, how we need them, how much oil we need, blah-blah-blah, all of that; but move again, move it away from the aquifer. Give us a chance. Thank you.    
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker No. 39.  
MS. TULQUIST: Thank you. My name is Heidi Tulquist, I am an environmental toxicologist and risk assessor with AECOM, that is an environmental consulting firm. I've been working in this field for 23 years, and for the last 16 years specifically evaluating pipeline risk and the environmental consequences of spills. Most of my pipeline risk assessment work has been for federal agencies, but for the last four years I've been using the same types of analysis to evaluate impacts associated with the Keystone XL pipeline. Based on my professional experience and technical expertise, the Keystone XL pipeline poses minimal risk to the environmental resources, particularly the Ogallala Aquifer. Concerns that the Ogallala Aquifer could suffer severe impacts if a pipeline spill were to occur are completely unfounded. Impacts to ground water, if any, would be highly localized. Let me explain. First of all, Keystone recognizes the importance of ground water in Nebraska, but it's a common misconception that the Ogallala Aquifer is an underground reservoir where oil and spread indefinitely. Rather, the Ogallala Aquifer is a complex, heterogenous geological formation composed of sands, gravels, silts and clays that have been deposited over millions of years through deposition of streams across Nebraska. The Ogallala Aquifer acts as a sand filter, where water moves slowly, moving approximately one foot per day, moving from the West to the East. That equates to 365 feet per year. The Keystone XL route crosses the Eastern tip of the Ogallala Aquifer in Nebraska. So the majority of the Ogallala Aquifer is upgradient of the pipeline. For groundwater impacts to occur, a series of events have to happen. First, a spill would need to occur in an unconfined area within shallow groundwater, and a spill would have to be of sufficient size to reach the groundwater. And the spill would have to have time to reach the groundwater surface. Fortunately, the majority of the route is located over confining geological materials, which prevents surface contamination from reaching the Ogallala Aquifer. Even if the spill was not immediately cleaned up, as is required by state and federal laws, crude oil itself has limited mobility in ground water. Field studies have been conducted all over the United States that have repeatedly demonstrated that impacts to groundwaters are typically limited to 300 feet or less. Further, once the contamination reaches the groundwater surface, there's little vertical migration across the aquifer. Thus, any impacts would be limited to the uppermost portion of the aquifer. Thus in the unlikely event of the spill that would reach groundwater, impacts would be highly localized both horizontally and vertically in the aquifer. Based on several years of intensive study of this route, it is my professional opinion that he Keystone pipeline does not pose a significant risk to groundwater in the Ogallala Aquifer. The Final EIS concluded that there was no incident scenario that could affect the entire Ogallala Aquifer. In the unlikely event that a spill did reach groundwater, impacts again would be highly localized, and Keystone would be required to remediate groundwater to meet federal and state water quality standards. I urge the Department of State to approve the Presidential Permit and a favorable decision on the national interest determination. Thank you.    
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker No. 40.  
MR. WILDS: Thank you for the opportunity to provide testimony on the Keystone XL project. My name is Robert Wilds, I'm a special pipeline representative of the International Union of Operating Engineers. The International Union of Operating Engineers represents 400,000 construction workers across the United States. Contractors employing operating engineers and the other crafts that are represented here today, have constructed over 30,000 miles of pipeline in the last ten years. The Keystone XL project will create thousands of jobs in construction, manufacturing at a time when the construction industry and the economy really needs a boost. The construction works will spend their wages from this project in communities along the pipeline route, given all the local economy some much-needed revenue. As far as manufacturing jobs, they will come from the pipe being made in Arkansas, the valves being made in Ohio. Construction companies such as Caterpillar and John Deere and their dealers, servicing the equipment and building equipment for this project. Creating more jobs means more tax revenue and more benefits for our communities. This $7 billion private sector project will be built without the use of public funds. Along with Canadian crude that this pipeline will import to the United States, a large portion of the pipeline's capacity will be taken up with American crude from North Dakota, and Montana. The Keystone XL pipeline will be state-of- the-art in technology and safety. The Department of Transportation statistics show that pipelines are the safest, most economical and ecological way to transport crude oil and natural gas across the United States. The Keystone XL project will be regulated by the Department of Transportation. The company will also be mandated by the Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration to incorporate 57 special conditions along the whole pipeline route, conditions to which no other whole pipeline in the country is subject to. From special construction techniques to enhanced specifications and design materials, these conditions ensure the commit to safety by all parties involved in the construction, operation and regulation of this project. The environmental review is clear: This pipeline will improve the environment and the safety of the general public. It will also reduce our dependence on heavy crude oil from unstable foreign countries. That of course improves our national security. Some people may ask how could a pipeline secure our national security? It already has been proven in past history that a pipeline has helped our national security. In the 1940s President Franklin Roosevelt ordered the construction of the Emergency War lines from Texas to the East Coast. They were called the Big Inch and the Little Big Inch; a 24 inch and a 20 inch crude oil line to go to the refineries on the East Coast to supply our manufacturing facilities, which were all on the East Coast at that time, so we could man the war -- in World War II. They were tankering the oil around before from Texas, the Germans were sitting out in the Atlantic, the German U-boats, sinking the tankers. We had to do something. Kept our military men and women who were putting their life on the line so that we would have the right to come here and demonstrate our opinion on what we are doing here today, from both sides. If it were not for those pipelines, those people would have lost their lives in World War II in vain. With that being said, the International Union of Operating Engineers supports the development of the Keystone XL projects and it believes it is in the interest of all Americans. Therefore, on behalf of the International Union of Operating Engineers, I respectfully request that the Department of State please find TransCanada XL project in our national interest and approve the Presidential Permit. Thank you for the opportunity to comment today.    
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker No. 41.  
MS. KRUZE: My name is Bonnie Kruze. I'm a Nebraska past state president of the General Federation of Women's Clubs. I'm a member of the League of Women Voters, I'm a Rotarian. I'm a member of the Seward County Ground Water Guardian Team, and I am a member of the Seward Citizens on Pipeline Route Committee. I'm a concerned and active citizen. Pipelines break, leak and spill. Deny the Presidential Permit for the XL pipeline. This is not a knee-jerk reaction; it is based on what we have learned and observed. TransCanada will only do what the U.S. Department of State requires them to do to get the pipeline built. What TransCanada agrees to do and what they actually do are two different things. Instead of fixing a problem up front, they try to negotiate their way out of it or pass the buck. We learned and observed this when the first Keystone pipeline was built. There are lots of examples, from violating road haul agreements, failing to restore the land, to bullying land owners. But I only have three minutes. So do you really think you have thought of everything? After reading the EIS executive statement, I don't think so. This pipeline is to be built from steel and pipe made in China, which has only 75 percent the strength of U.S. steel. Let's talk about real jobs. The best welders cannot make up for the weak pipe made in China.    The U.S. Department of State is not demanding that the pipeline be made of strong U.S. steel that would indeed create a significant number of jobs. Deny the Presidential Permit. Pipelines break, leak and spill. The EIS statement indicates reporting, report, record keeping, certification, for the final eight conditions for certification, from the senior officer of Keystone that has complied with the special conditions. This action is tantamount to putting the fox in charge of the hen house. Deny the Presidential Permit. Pipelines break, leak and spill. The EIS statement says, a no-spill incident scenario with the entire Northern High Plains Aquifer system be adversely affected. Professor John Stansbury, Associate Professor of Environmental Water Resources Engineering at the University of Nebraska, an instructor for the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers Risk Assessment Program reported that a spill in the Sand Hills above the aquifer could dump as much as 180,000 barrels of crude oil, tanking the vast water supply in the region. The EIS was developed by Entrix, the same company that is used by both U.S. Department of State and TransCanada. It is obvious that the EIS is biased in favor of TransCanada. The U.S. Department of State has failed to respond to Stansbury's analysis of worst-case spills from the proposed Keystone XL pipeline. Pipelines break, leak and spill. Deny the Presidential Permit. The U.S. Department of State has the power to demand that this pipeline be moved away from the aquifer; but no, the EIS statement says: The Western alternative was eliminated since it was financially impracticable. If you can't afford to build this pipeline right, using the strongest U.S. steel, and you can't afford to place it in a route to avoid the Sand Hills region and the Ogallala Aquifer that supplies drinking water to 2 million people, then you have no business building the pipeline at all.    Pipelines break, leak and spill. Deny the Presidential Permit. What about the threat of terrorism? This pipeline is to be built only four feet underground through the Ogallala Aquifer, which supplies drinking water for 2 million people. Maps of the location of this pipeline are easily obtainable. And it wouldn't take a major blowup of the pipeline. The EIS analysis acknowledges the pipeline system can spill as much as 1.7 million gallons of diluted bitumen a day without triggering the real time leak detection system. Pipelines break, leak and spill. Deny the Presidential Permit. This pipeline is not in the national interest. The oil in this pipeline is from tar sands, mined and developed by foreign-owned companies operating in Canada. The oil is to be pumped through a pipeline built by TransCanada from steel and pipe made in China, and transported through the United States, putting U.S. land and water at risk so the oil can be sold to foreign countries. Once this pipeline is in the ground, we are forced to live with it and its consequences for generations to come. Secretary of Energy Chu, you can't have your cake and eat it, too. There's no trade-off to risking the environment for a reliable supply. Pipelines break, leak and spill. Deny the Presidential Permit. Behold! a pipeline cometh. Machines zoom large will snort and growl, behemoths gobbling up the soil, gouging and gorging earth's deep bowel, fia- mounts  explained, a mindless toil. Disrupted earth, your water rages, of flights upon trains so fair, not again add shameful pages to God's trust placed in his care. Blades and Boards have sot the fields, raking clefts across the plains, granary cade with stunted yields, laments the loss of promised gains. Like viscous fluid pulses on through gaseous crests upon the earth, bystanders played the role of pawn as pipes snaked subtle throbs of dirth. Piked payments scratch at what is lost, time only passed will answers give. Children to come shall bear the cost, praying their families safely live. Uncertain life within us grows, we wait on God to show us light, trusting that He only knows, teaching us what's true and right. [Phonetic]    
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Before I call on 42, I stated at the outset that we would accommodate your elected officials to the extent that we could. And I understand that Senator Bill Avery wanted to be here today but couldn't because of a death in his family. So he has asked that his staff member, Patrick Adams, speak on his behalf. And so Patrick, if you can come forward and give the remarks on behalf of your Senator, we'd appreciate it. If you could make them as succinct as possible, we'd appreciate it.  
MR. ADAMS: I'll try. First of all, thank you and welcome to the 28th District. This is Bill Avery's remarks on the pipeline: For the record, I am not opposed to an international pipeline. I realize that there are currently hundreds of natural gas and oil pipelines across Nebraska and across the United States. I have sent a letter to President Obama and Secretary Clinton indicating that while I do not oppose the pipeline or its purpose, based on our historical needs for oil and gas, I have several very serious reservations about TransCanada's operations and procedure for route approval. I am extremely concerned about TransCanada's questionable record of pipeline maintenance. Keystone I has already experienced 12 spills in its first year, but claims no fault because those spills were at pumping stations. That's more first-year spills than any other pipeline in U.S. history. Keystone I was recently issued a Federal Corrective Action Order in June 2011 by the U.S. Department of Transportation to take necessary action to protect the public, property and the environment from potential hazards associated with two spills this summer in Sargent County, North Dakota and Doniphan County, Kansas. There is absolutely no denying that spills will happen. Enbridge dumped over one million gallons of tar sands crude into Michigan's Kalamazoo River, polluting and closing the waterway to fishing and swimming for six months. ExxonMobile spilled 42,000 gallons of oil into the Yellowstone River, contaminating National Park waterway. The good people of Louisiana, where I attended Tulane University, will suffer for decade from the tragedy of British Petroleum's offshore explosion. Spills can and will happen. They will poison our waterways and kill our wildlife. The Sands are home to the endangered Whooping and SandHill Crane migratory bird species, the endangered American Burying Beetle, and dozens of waterfowl and wildlife. Even worse, viscous tar sands, which won't float like sweet crude, will sink into our porous Ogallala Aquifer, contaminate our clean water systems, and cause catastrophic and irreversible damage. If we don't stop this now, future generations will forever wonder why we allowed this to happen. I am opposed to TransCanada's questionable and deceptive tactics. It's a very serious problem when a foreign corporation can enter your State and dictate what's going to happen on our private property.   Property that has been held by generations of Nebraskan  family farmers. The U.S. State Department must acknowledge that TransCanada did not have proper permits to threaten to invoke eminent domain. It's unethical and it's against the law. I have a copy of the letter that they sent to landowners threatening land condemnation, intimidation and deception of our citizens is real. Furthermore, I am outraged that TransCanada has briefed our legislative staff, partnered with our local unions, sent the Consulate General of Canada to meet with me, sponsored our Nebraska State Fair, and implied University of Nebraska backing on Husker game days, all while declaring to be our friend. Friends don't send hostile letters to innocent landowners. They don't infiltrate our state with unsubstantiated illusions about increased jobs an decreased oil prices at a time when working families, farmers and cattle ranchers are clinging to their livelihoods and barely making ends meet. Friends don't turn a deaf ear when a state pleads for them to shelter their drinking water from toxic crude oil and their fragile ecosystems from erosion. Our two U.S. senators have said no. One U.S. Representative has said no. Our Governor, Dave Heineman, has asked the president to deny TransCanada's permit based on location. Our university has told TransCanada to get their advertisements out of Memorial Stadium. Thirty Nebraskans peacefully protesting TransCanada's tactics have been arrested at the White House. Our Legislature is seriously considering, and I support, a costly special session to protect our State from TransCanada's refusal to hear us that your aquifer is Nebraska's most precious resource. They've threatened our landowners with eminent domain and land condemnation, invaded our airwaves and newspapers with confusing and manipulative advertising and made questionable political contributions to our lawmakers. Today, TransCanada has caused hundreds of Nebraskans take the day off, drive across the State, and show up again to voice their serious concerns. How many more times can Nebraska tell you: We do not want the Ogallala Aquifer and Sand Hills adversely affected by TransCanada's dirty tar sands sludge. The Final Environmental Impact Statement report indicated that for 65 miles, Keystone XL pipeline will be less than 10 feet away from the aquifer. That simply is not acceptable. The aquifer provides 78 percent of Nebraska's clean drinking water, and provides 83 percent of Nebraska's total irrigation water and crops. We do not want TransCanada jeopardizing our clean water, irrigation source or the livelihood of Nebraska family farmers with vague and unfounded promises. We will not risk a spill on our watch. I've heard the arguments about ending our dependence on foreign oil; about Canada being a friendly nation we can count on; about TransCanada being a neighbor who will invest in our communities. I understand about the need for new jobs in a time of economic instability, and quite frankly, I am not moved. I am simply not convinced that these promises can and will be guaranteed by TransCanada. Are we willing to simply gamble away Nebraska's environmental future on uncertainties or temporary labor jobs and oil that, once refined, is not earmarked for American use? On a company who has a history of deceptive trade practices and faulty equipment installation? Given that TransCanada refuses to be a friend and acknowledge their corporate responsibility, Nebraskans will continue to be resolute in their stewardship of our environment, our land, our history and heritage for the future of our children. We are unwavering in our support for what our families have spent generations protecting, and we will not back down. There is a solution, and we all know it.  May I finish? I've to one  paragraph yet. May I finish? 
MS. HOBGOOD: If you can speed it up.  
MR. ADAMS: All right. Absent a good faith effort from TransCanada to voluntarily propose to Nebraska another pipeline route, the U.S. State Department must reject this application and TransCanada must move the Keystone XL pipeline east. Get it off the majority of the Ogallala Aquifer, keep it out of our extremely fragile ecosystem. Why is it so hard for TransCanada to move the pipeline east? To follow its existing Keystone I pipeline route? Is it because they were deceptively acquiring land ahead of their application approval and would not have to obtain new landowner easement rights? Let me remind you: TransCanada's bottom line is not our problem. It is incumbent on the U.S. State Department to reject approval of this permit and require TransCanada to reroute the Keystone XL pipeline away from the Sand Hills and Ogallala Aquifer. Then and only then will this project win our confidence and likely acquire broad support in Nebraska. The Keystone XL pipeline may be in the national interest, but the route is absolutely not in Nebraska's interest. As Nebraskans, we respectfully request -- no, we absolutely demand the rejection of TransCanada's permit application. Thank you.    
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker No. 42.  
MR. KRUZE: My name is John Kruze, I'm a Rotarian and Landowner. I'm a member of the I'm a member of the Seward County Ground Water Guardian Team, and the Seward Citizens on Pipeline Route Committee. Today I'm speaking to you as a Rotarian. The Rotary four way test is used to evaluate what we think, say and do. The test asks the following questions: Is it the truth? Is it fair to all concerned? Will it bring good will and better friendships? Will it be beneficial to all concerned? The Final Environmental Impact Statement for the proposed Keystone XL pipeline fails the four- way test. The Final EIS is not true. The most pertinent point is the administer for PHMSA has stated to Congress multiple times that the PHMSA has not studied the safety issues regarding diluted bitumen, and present safety regulations do not take any differences into account. In addition, University of Nebraska's John Stansbury, Associate Professor of Environmental, Water Resources at the University of Nebraska, and an instructor for U.S. Army Corps of Engineers Risk Assessment Program submitted an extensive analysis of worst case bills from the proposed Keystone XL pipeline. This analysis documents numerous discrepancies and inaccurate science which have been ignored by the U.S. Department of State. U.S. DOT maps show that high consequence areas are out of date and currently, there is no procedure for updating those maps. The EIS is not fair to all concerned. The EIS cites the issues of environmental justice from minority and low income populations. At the same time there's nothing in the EIS that addresses the use of eminent domain. Landowners who were offered at one time payment in perpetuity have been bullied into signing easement agreements under the threat of eminent domain before the Presidential Permit has been determined. The pipeline devalues their land and puts their land, water and livelihood at risk. Koch Industries, with annual revenues estimated to be $100 billion, is well-positioned in cash in billions of dollars from increased tar sands imports from the XL pipeline. At the same time, the EIS states, the Western alternative route, which would avoid the Ogallala Aquifer, was eliminated since it was financially impractical. The EIS does not build good will and better friendships. The EIS is an embarrassment. The EIS, in supporting the pipeline while stating the fact that producing oil from tar sands generates 17 percent more of the carbon and other greenhouse gas emissions that are warming our planet than conventional oil in this country. It is 19 percent dirtier than Middle East sour; 13 percent dirtier than Mexican heavy, and 16 percent dirtier than Venezuelan crudes. This is embarrassing. This EIS does not ensure that there is a strong science and policy basis for our environmental policy. The United States needs to be a leader to move the nation to greater reliance on increased energy security and protect the public health and environment especially in the sensitive areas of our country. How can we build good will and better friendships when we don't respect ourselves? How can we build good will and better friendships on a pipeline built on greed? The EIS and the XL pipeline is not beneficial to all. In a letter to President Obama, nine Nobel laureates including the Dahli Lama and Desmond Tutu and the Iranian human rights activist Shirin Ebadi urged President Obama to reject the proposed pipeline, saying it will not only hurt the people in the U.S., but will also endanger the entire planet. The letter states: All along its prospective route, the pipeline endangers farms, wildlife and precious water aquifers, including the Ogallala Aquifer, the U.S. main source of fresh water for America's heartland. We are aware that Nebraska's Governor, Dave Heineman, as well as two Nebraska Senators, has urged you to reconsider the pathway of the pipeline. In his letter to you, it clearly stated his concern about the threat to this crucial water source for Nebraska farmers and ranchers. The aquifer supplies drinking water to 2 million people in Nebraska and seven other states. We understand that strip mining and drilling tar sands from under Alberta's Boreal forest, and then transporting thousands of barrels of oil a day from Canada through Texas will not only hurt the people in the U.S. but will also endanger the entire planet. After the oil fields of Saudia Arabia, the full development of the Alberta tar sands will create the world's second-largest potential source of global warming gases. As NASA climatologist James Hansen said, "This is essentially 'game over' for the climate.' The U.S. fails the Rotary four way test; a review by the White House Council on Environmental Quality is in order. Thank you very much.    
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker No. 43.  
MR. GROSS: Thank you. My name is Tom Gross. I'm a Special Representative over pipeline and gas distribution for the United Association of Journeymen and Apprentices in the Plumbing and Pipefitting industry, United States and Canada. Thank you for allowing me to address this hearing. I represent 340,000 members of the United Association along with their families. The UA, as my organization is known, provides highly trained craftsmen and women who build everything from homes, schools, hospitals, power plants, manufacturing facilities. Our members will be the ones to construct the Keystone XL pipeline. It is important to the United Association that everyone understands that the security of our environment is, and will continue to be, an important concern to us. We are deeply committed to preserving our air, water, natural resources for the future generations. What we also know, pipelines have already been shown to be the safest as well as the most economically viable and environmentally secure way to transport oil. I have seen firsthand the construction of pipelines throughout North American, and I can tell you that when the UA is involved, you can rest assured that they are built with the utmost skill, integrity, and commitment to safety. The UA spends more than $200 million a year in training our members for these type of projects. The State Department is correct when it states the Keystone XL pipeline will have minimal environmental impact. The route has been carefully prepared, rerouted to ensure fragile aquifers will not be disturbed. This project will continue the tradition of environmental integrity that the UA and our signatory contractors have demonstrated for many decades. Keystone is the most scrutinized project in recent memory. I can think of no project that has been reviewed more thoroughly than this one, but that's fine with us, because we know that this project will be safe and environmentally sound; that's how we build our pipelines. Four of the most important questions facing our nation today are: How can we create more jobs? How can we increase our energy supply while reducing our dependency on oil from the Middle East? How can we further ensure our national security? And how can we do all this and still protect our environment? The TransCanada Keystone XL pipeline project can help answer all three of those questions.  So perhaps another important question should follow: How can we say no to a project that can go a very long way in answering each of these questions? The reality is, we cannot. Creating jobs, enhancing energy independence, improving national security, the Keystone pipeline will do all of these and more. Please support this important project for all Americans. Thank you.    
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker No. 44.  
MS. BENNETT: I'm Betsy Blake Bennett from Hastings, Nebraska. I'm a Deacon in the Episcopal Diocese of Nebraska and a Board Member of Nebraska Interfaith Power & Light. Welcome to Nebraska. I share the concerns of other Nebraskans about the effects of this proposed pipeline on our land and water. But my testimony focuses on the discussion of greenhouse gas emissions in the State Department's Environmental Impact Statement, which says that the production and use of oil sands crude has a greater carbon impact than other forms of oil, but then dismisses that impact from consideration. The arguments for this dismissal seem to be that the carbon emissions gap between this and other forms of oil might decrease over time, and that the tar sands will be developed regardless of the pipeline, so we in the United States may as well cooperate in its development. Suppose little Johnny steals a toy from a neighbor's yard. When his parents tell him this was wrong he says, "But if I didn't take it, Tommy would have, so I didn't do anything wrong." His parents, of course, will tell Johnny that stealing the toy was wrong, even if someone else does take it in the end. The moral logic of the argument that without this pipeline, the tar sands will be developed anyway, so we may as well have a hand in increasing greenhouse gas emissions is the same as Johnny's defense of his wrongdoing, but with much more at stake. Our Episcopal House of Bishops last week released a pastoral teaching on the environment. In it our bishops say science confirms what we already know; our human footprint is changing the face of the earth, and because we come from the earth, it is changing us, too. We are engaged in the process of destroying our very being. Deep down, we all do know that, though our actions reveal that we aren't always honest with ourselves about what we know. Gary Trudeau's Doonesbury strip this Sunday featured an interview with an honest man, who said that he opposes development of a sound climate policy because he cares much more for his own short term economic interest than for the future of the planet. This is the ideology of monetary gain before all else. As a Christian, that is not my ideology.    The dismissal of the dangerously high amount of greenhouse gases released by development of the tar sands mirrors such thinking. The arguments favoring building this pipeline come down to possible short term economic gain with no regard for the future. And the way the environmental impact statement addresses this issue, with assistance we learned last week from TransCanada's lobbyists, suggests that this State Department is more concerned about short term political gain than the future of the planet. It is folly to omit the enormous climate effects of mining, processing and burning the tar sands from the decision-making process. Climate change is not in our national interest, nor in the interest of however many generations manage to come after us, on the hot and storm-filled planet that will be our legacy if we fail to act with wisdom and with reverence for this earth that God pronounced good at its creation. With concern for our land, water and the future of life in this State and on this planet, I oppose permitting construction of the Keystone XL pipeline. Thank you.    
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker No. 45. MR. Chrisensen: Thank you, United States State Department for putting these events on in Lincoln, Nebraska and Atkinson. My name is Graham Christensen, I'm with the Nebraska Farmers Union. I'm also a fifth generation farm kid from Nebraska whose family has farmed in Nebraska for 144 years now; and so I can relate to the folks in the Sand Hills that have been here just as long as our family has, when they've been lied to, manipulated, pushed around and threatened with eminent domain. That this company does not have, especially if the government hasn't even approved this project. This reminds me of a story that I was told when I was younger, when I asked a Native American friend of mine, "Why do you get concerned when you call a football team the 'Indians'?" And he said, "Because we're sensitive to this. When somebody asks you not to do something, why do you go forth and continue to do this?" This was a lesson for me on respect. And Nebraskans now are saying "We do not want this in our back yards, we do not want to jeopardize our livelihoods and our life blood in this aquifer. There is no need for this." But this is a bigger issue. This is about transporting energy from tar sands that are not even necessarily owned in big parts by the Canadians, but China, Korea and many other countries as well shipping it through a Canadian pipeline down to the Southern ports in the Gulf Coast that aren't necessarily completely American-owned, either. So how does it make sense that all of a sudden we become a country -- how is it in the best national interest that we become a country that at all cost will ship this product all the way through without having much decision period on where this product will go to, and the end result. We'll be competing against China, South America, India and the United States will compete, too. But when we finally get this energy source -- if we get to use it domestically, we will be at increased and inflated gas rates. How is this in our national best interest? This makes absolutely no sense at all. So this is not good for either country; not the United States nor Canada -- neither country is this good for the common person. And anyway, all this is good for is Big Oil, and at our expense, with our lifeblood at stake. But the good news is we have a choice right now. We have a choice to change our energy direction. We have a choice to create opportunity from right here, starting in Nebraska, all throughout the country, with different kinds of energy sources. We're so blessed with the natural resources that we have, with all kinds of different energy sources from these natural resources. Cleaner energy, energy that creates a long term scenario of jobs; not just a short-term stimulus. A long-term scenario of jobs where agricultural teams up with labor to make this happen. We can do this. But we need a little bit of help here. It's obvious where the numbers of people are. They're on our side of this issue, for the folks that are educated. We can create a long term scenario that gets this economy back in place right now, or we can do the short term stimulus that pushes us years back. Finally, just don't ignore the signs that are going on in this world. Catastrophic disaster, one after another. Spill after spill, pollution contamination of ways that we've never seen before. Unexplainable, but they're speaking to us. Don't ignore these signs. Make the right decision here, President Obama, Secretary of State Clinton, United States State Department: Stop this project in its tracks. Do the right thing. Let's create a future for our kids and for the future generations, and let's continue to lead as a country by creativity and innovation for years and years to come. Don't let us be that country that just caters to the energy needs of others. We need to be the global leader, we need to lead by example. Thank you.    
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker No. 46.  
MR. SWANSON: Thank you for being here today. My name is Paul Swanson, I'm retired emeritus from the University of Nebraska, and currently an organic farmer. I speak today opposed to the current pipeline proposal, primarily because of the route. People today earlier have talked in terms of the importance and the uniqueness of the Ogallala Aquifer. We have seen disasters, a great number in the last few years, and I would submit that they are primarily man-made disasters. Why? Because we built a great city below sea level in the midst of a large hurricane area. That decision was made years ago. I would submit that the same sort of decision was made in Japan when they built on a major fault a nuclear reactor, knowing the almost inevitable consequences. Today we have the opportunity to make the first decision and avoid that disaster.    I oppose this pipeline for that the reason. I am favor, however, of an alternate route that totally avoids the Sand Hills and the Ogallala Aquifer. We look today only at economics and only for the short term. I would submit to you the time is coming when water has greater value than oil, even in economic terms.    Biological life cannot survive without water, and the Ogallala Aquifer is one of the world's largest high quality water sources. Therefore I ask that you reject this pipeline. Thank you.    
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. It's now approximately 3:25. What I'd like to do is call on Speaker 47, and then we can take a break. We will resume at 4 o'clock with Speaker No. 48; 47, if you can speak, thank you.  
MS. DUNAVAN: My name is Susan Dunavan. I'm a land owner in Southern York County, Nebraska, whose native pasture is in the path of the proposed Keystone XL pipeline. I am not a liberal, an environmentalist or a radical; I do not belong to any extremist groups. But I am concerned about our water supply, the contamination of the Ogallala Aquifer, and the proposed route of the pipeline. I am also disturbed that a foreign company can come into our country, into the State of Nebraska and threaten me, not just once but twice, with eminent domain condemnation before any permits are issued. Five different land agents have approached us over the last two years to sign easements. We have sent five certified letters to TransCanada, including two certified letters to Robert Jones, Vice President of TransCanada, that remain unanswered. Each easement that was offered to us raised more questions. We would write another certified letter, it would still remain unanswered. I do not understand how a company that can spend hundreds of thousands of dollars on advertising in newspapers, magazines and television, and does not have the courtesy or the money to answer a landowner's letter.    Is the Keystone XL pipeline in the best interest of the United States? The Environmental Impact Statement mentions that the exact destinations of the oil that would be transported by the proposed project area are uncertain. Is supplying Canadian oil to the rest of the world in our national interest? Is the proposed route through the Ogallala Aquifer the best route for the pipeline? TransCanada said that they did not want to change their route because their expenses would increase. Is that our concern? Is not our water source more valuable than a foreign company's bottom line?    I have heard Vice President Robert Jones of TransCanada quote Jim Goedecke, a research hydrologist at the University of Nebraska on many occasions. I've read a quote from Jim Goedecke stating that "any risk from an oil sands spill would be restricted to a small part of the aquifer." To me, any part of the aquifer is way beyond acceptable.    How many jobs would the pipeline create for Nebraskans? I read the testimony of Dave Hayes, international representative of the Laborers Union of North America which was given at the natural resources hearing on February 9, 2011. He said that 250 temporary workers would be hired. Is hiring 250 temporary laborers worth jeopardizing the drinking water of over 2 million people?    I am hoping that you see the folly of putting an oil pipeline through the water supply of millions of people. Do not allow the Presidential Permit to be issued. If a Presidential Permit is granted, insist that the pipeline route be moved so it can be built in clay soil instead of sand and water. The Ogallala Aquifer and the Sand Hills of Nebraska are national treasures that need to be protected and preserved.    
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Let me just repeat, we're going to take a break until 4 o'clock p.m., and we will resume at that time with No. 48. Thank you.   
MS. HOBGOOD: We are about to get started. I'd just like to make a couple of comments before we hear from Speaker No. 48. First, I'd like to thank everyone for being here. We have currently over 200 speakers that have signed up, and I think that's an indication of the importance you attach to this issue. Given the number of speakers, we would very kindly ask that you limit your remarks to three minutes. You can certainly submit your comments in writing; you can do that today. We are accepting written comments through midnight, October 9th. You can fax comments to us. We really want you to be able to convey your views to us in a variety of means. We're also going to display the card after two minutes, and then when your time is done. Again, we understand the importance you attach to the issue, and we want to hear from as many speakers as possible. One thing you might consider is if a previous speaker has expressed your sentiment, you could just consider indicating that, and shortening your statement. But again, we'd like to hear from as many people as possible. So with that, I'd like to call on Speaker No. 48. If you can state your name and affiliation.  
MR. DUNAVAN: Thank you. Ms. Hobgood and Mr. Stewart, Hillary Clinton, my name is Bill Dunavan of 1312 Road 6, York, Nebraska in the south part of the county. I'm a landowner whose property is in the path of the Keystone XL pipeline, and I've been threatened twice with condemnation proceedings. It's one thing to be asked to give up your property rights as an American citizen, but I think we might be giving up something else as well, something that the administration may not want to become notorius for. One thing might be the safety regulations. Isn't it true that every local gas station has a tank buried with liner, and aren't all the above-ground petroleum tanks surrounded by dike and berms and a huge network to protect the rest of the area in the case of a spill? In Nebraska we have center pivot systems; some of these irrigation systems are hydraulically powered; and if these lines are underground, they are also surrounded by a protective covering. It seems like these have been the way things are for the past 20 or 30 years, and yet we're suspending them for the sake of the pipeline. Why would you put something that's under very high pressure, carrying 750,000 barrels a day and not be required to do what the rest of us must do? But a second, more important issue, we might be suspending the Constitution of the United States in order to grant eminent domain powers to a foreign company. Does anyone else not find permission to do this in the 5th Amendment or 14th Amendment? And does the Constitution allow for eminent domain to assist with someone's export business? The slogan 'oil for America' touches all of us, but you may definitely won't to be sure that before approving a careless project, that this oil is directed to one of the largest seaports in the United States for a reason. On its way overseas, the oil in this pipeline will be the cause of much-degraded land and water in Nebraska, and will have polluted our Constitution in the process. Thank you.    
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker No. 49.  
MR. WALBERG: My name is Mark Walberg, I'm from Lincoln, Nebraska. Thanks to you all for coming out here. It doesn't take a scientist to look at any of the world's current oil spills to see that petroleum permanently destroys any ecosystem that it comes into contact with. Which is a major reason why there's so much opposition from Nebraskans here today. But it does take scientists to properly measure the risks involved in routing a tar sands oil/bitumen pipeline through the Sand Hills. We need a truly independent, scientific analysis that is accepted by the scientific community, not an assessment done by and for Big Business. Because of this need, I ask that you delay your decision to route an oil pipeline through the Sand Hills until you can be sure that it will not harm it. There are many federal agencies that specialize in this. Additionally, there are no regulations in place that protect the American landowner from tar sands oil companies. In determining a route for this pipeline, I ask that you respect and defend American landowners' rights to say no to risking their own land to an oil spill. That is another major reason there are so many Nebraskans here today. Please do not allow us to be steamrolled. Please reject this permit for the Keystone pipeline. Lastly, oil is a limited resource, which means once we've depleted this resource, our country and our world needs to have alternatives in place. Petroleum is the backbone that supports many industries, and once it is gone we need to make sure that these industries can continue to thrive. And while I appreciate that you've come here today to ask how to proceed with the dirty and soon-to-be exhausted energy supply, I would also suggest that our government develop an exit strategy for it. Please do this before you exhaust the unrenewable resource that is our clean environment and our ecological systems. Thank you.    
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker No. 50.  
MR. JOHNSON: Hello, thank you for being here. My name is Tyson Johnson, I'm student at the University of Nebraska here in Lincoln. I'm here because I'm standing in firm opposition to this pipeline, and because this pipeline is in no way involved with the future my generation was promised. I realize that it might be easy to write off my testimony as just another college activist, because I've firmly grasped the entirety of this situation; but I just don't believe that's the case. I grew up in a small town, less than 200 people; many of whom, my neighbors, my friends, members of my family on agriculture, our farmers, our ranchers. And my town survives from this agriculture sector. Our State, our economic engine, it starts there. Anything that puts that in so much jeopardy, it should not be considered. Nebraskans for months now have constantly questioned, refuted and shown what TransCanada has said is either wrong or exaggerated; and in response, we've gotten the runaround, we have been told that we are liars. Even today in response to our concerns about a spill in the aquifer, we've been told that it's unlikely it probably won't be that bad. "It probably won't be that bad" is not a response that I'm willing to take when my water and my natural resources are put at risk. And I see a lot of people behind me in orange shirts, many of whom were bused in from out of state, but I think if you remove the swath, I think it's quite evident where Nebraska stands on this issue, and we are against it. And it's not because I do not realize the concerns or understand why they appear; the need for jobs I great and it's present, but these are short term jobs that do not outweigh the cost or the potential risk of this project. And in a broader sense, why not put these people to work with permanent jobs that come from a renewable or greener source; not a source that is detrimental to everything and everyone along this pipeline route, from the destruction occurring in Canada in the exubation  of the tar sands to every state that this pipeline will pass through, if it is allowed. Now earlier, Mr. Friend and others told me that -- others here, that my opposition to this is based in extremist ideology, and that I need to educate myself on the free market. And in working to get my degree from the university in economics, as a freshman indeed they do teach us the benefit of the free market economy; and that is why I draw into question why it wasn't asked that, or pointed out that China is a key investor in Canadian tar sands oil. While Valero, a key exporter in oil, has said that it is likely that China would be the highest bidder. Whether or not this pipeline goes through, it is likely that much of this oil, through the free market, is going to end up in another country; and that is why this pipeline is not a solution to our national security. We keep hearing 'national security, national security' -- how can it be a solution when we are not guaranteed this oil in America? And we've been --    I'm not entirely convinced that especially the concerns of Nebraska have been realized -- I'll wrap this up -- but I just want to say, I agree with others when in this environmental impact study that has constantly been brought up as a way to justify this pipeline, we have to call into question the report in its entirety, as it is giant conflict of interest that Entrix, a company who has been an ally, has worked with TransCanada and other companies such as BP, was used to draw up this report. I think that's outrageous. I think you can imagine the outrage from the other side if an organization like Sierra Club was used to draw up this report, there would definitely be calls from everyone else. That's something we need to question. We need to reevaluate the scenario, and we need to revoke this pipeline, and I call Mr. -- for President Obama to deny the permit. Thank you.    
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker No. 51.  
MS. DUCKWORTH: Hello. I'm Linda Duckworth, President of the League of Women Voters of Nebraska. I'm from Omaha. And before I get started, I want to say thank you to my new friend, Randy Weaver of Hastings; and he asked me if I would say to you "Remember the trees and remember that they will be affected by any oil spill." And now I'm Susan Anthony for just a second. And I declare, I feel like fool standing here in my Susan B. Anthony getup, but if it gets your attention for a short while, my embarrassment will have been worth it. [In costume] Susan Anthony did say, after all, "Cautious, careful people always casting about to preserve their reputations never can bring about reform." Reform is needed badly if we are going to preserve and/or repair our environment. I'd like to share what the League of Women Voters has to say about this: The League of Women Voters of Nebraska supports a water policy which promotes wise use and care of water resources, guided by the principle that water be managed in the public interest. Further, we have studied this particular issue for years, and have taken a position on the Keystone XL pipeline. It is this: Deny the permits and allow TransCanada to go back to the drawing board with routing plans. I know you have been hearing reasons for approving the project, and will continue to; but you may have noticed, they all point to short term profit of some sort. Otherwise, no benefits to Americans, none. It's time we looked to our future. I remember as a college student in the Seventies we began to take an interest in more renewable forms of energy. Somehow the time never seemed right to our elected leaders; always there was something, whether inflation, jobs, corruption, nuclear proliferation fears; but always something kept us from doing what we knew would need to be done eventually. That something is getting ourselves away from dirty energy that runs our water supply. A good first step is to say no to the pipeline carrying tar sands oil mixed with toxic chemicals. That mess, hurtling through a pipeline at up to 60 miles per hour has no business going anywhere near our Ogallala Aquifer or our fragile Nebraska Sand Hills. Of course there will be leaks and spills, and the cleanup will not be a true cleaning. I've heard it said that the administration is in big trouble with one group or another no matter what decision is made. Between a rock and a hard place, in other words. So I say, "Go ahead and make the right decision." TransCanada knows the route they've all but built is a poor choice from an environmental standpoint. But TransCanada can go back and take another look at other routes. If the result is a longer pipeline, then perhaps even more jobs, short term though they are, will be created. Let us remember that the term --  You've said 'thank you' so I guess I will not tell you what my last paragraph was going to say. But I do want to say, a good first step is for the U.S. Government in the form of our Department of State to deny the permits for the currently-proposed TransCanada XL pipeline. Thank you.    
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker 52.  
MR. TETHEROW: Good afternoon. I'm Jim Tetherow, and I'm affiliated with my family. I fully understand that my opinion represents approximately one six billionth of the world population. I thank you for allowing me to express it. Now I'm usually very reluctant to make predictions, especially about the future. But in this case, I want to say that no matter how carefully planned, no matter how skillfully constructed by our union friends here, no matter what beautiful safeguards are put in place, I have the full power of Murphy's Law behind me when I predict: This pipeline will leak.    When it leaks, the spillage will find its way to the Ogallala Aquifer. Once there, it's there forever. This water is underground, you can't skim it off the top, you can't burn it off the top; it's just there. Now I'm probably not going to be alive for this tragedy to have any effect on me, but I'm concerned about my great and great-great grandchildren. I'm concerned about them having to drink oil. I'm concerned about them watering their vegetable gardens with oil. I'm concerned about them watering their crops and livestock which feed a great portion of the world with oil. I wonder how happy they're going to be when they have to bathe their babies in oil. The propaganda we've been exposed to on our media tells us this pipeline will ensure the security of our oil supply. This is patently a lie, as the refined product is not guaranteed to stay in America; it will be put on the world market and sold to the highest bidder. We're being told that allowing this pipeline will lower the price of gasoline at our pumps. Really? I'll believe that when I see it. We've been promised any where from 2500 to 40,000 jobs -- depending on whose lies you're hearing -- however many jobs there are, that's wonderful. Our working families will benefit from the income, our businesses, all levels of government, our churches and charities will benefit from this income -- that's wonderful. We're reminded that there are already many miles of pipelines crossing our state. This is true. It's also true that these existing pipelines leak. I'm not really opposed to the building of this pipeline; I'm extremely opposed to the route chosen by Keystone for this pipeline. I'm outraged, outraged at the thought that we will allow a foreign company to come to the United States with a cavalier disregard for the safety of our water supply and tell us what they are going to do and where they're going to do it.    I'm dismayed that the State Department would even give this -- let me be kind here -- idiotic proposal enough consideration to create the need for this meeting. Now, Washington, D.C. is a totally different economic world from Nebraska. You ma'am and you, sir, probably make what many Nebraskans would consider an obscene income. As your ultimate taxpaying employer, I ask you not to approve of the pipeline to be built along the route currently being proposed by Keystone. This company is known as TransCanada; tell them to trans across Canada, build their own refineries and pollute their own country.    
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker No. 53.  
MR. FREEMAN: Hello. My name is John Freeman. A lot of passionate, opinionated people have spoken before me, so I'll be very brief. Clearly, intelligent people can disagree. I have lived in Nebraska all my life and I've worked in the energy industry for 30 years. I believe in TransCanada's focus on safety and environmental stewardship. I know for a fact that this project will create real jobs without federal stimulus dollars. Oil will be part of our energy profile for a few more decades, and Keystone XL represents a reliable, secure and abundant source from a government with which we share substantial culture and values. Many Nebraskans, including myself, believe that this pipeline is in the national interest. Thank you.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you.    
MS. HOBGOOD: Speaker No. 54.  
MR. GRAZIANO: Hello, my name is Steve Graziano, and I live in Lincoln, Nebraska. I just moved back to Lincoln; I spent several years recently in Louisiana. And in Louisiana you learn the importance of oil to the economy of the state and to the nation as a whole. You also learn the importance of the environment in Louisiana, as a food source, as a source of economic development. I was down south in Louisiana when the BP oil spill took place, and I saw firsthand the damage that it did to both the coast and to the economy. Now earlier today I heard a state senator quote the U.S. State Department's report saying that any spill from the XL pipeline would not damage the entire Ogallala Aquifer. And that word caught my era, the 'entire' Ogallala Aquifer. It probably wouldn't; but all it has to do is affect the part that we drink from to cause a real problem. Now I think we ought to build that people, but I don't think we ought to build it on top of the aquifer. Because as we've seen in the Gulf of Mexico, and as I saw myself personally, oil and water do not mix. Thank you.    
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker No. 55.  
MR. MILLER: Thank you for the opportunity to speak here today. My name is Randy Miller. I am here with members of the union, Pipeliners Local 798. Many of those members live here in Nebraska, Oklahoma, Texas. This particular group, my group of 798 Pipeliners are 7,000 strong. Included within that group are the thousands of the very best welders this nation has, the best trained, the absolutely best managed, best supervised, most accountable workforce that this could have. I have spent the last 30 years dealing with environmental issues relating to the pipeline. This pipeline is only acceptable to Nebraska, to my home State of Oklahoma -- I live on a farm there, I did live on a farm there. I grew up on it. If it's built right. If these welders don't put it together right, then this pipeline is not going to last the hundred years that it's built to last for. So the neighbors, our members that the are neighbors with the folks here and our members that are out there building the kind of infrastructure this nation has to have to move into - - for the next generation and beyond. We're all glad to be here, and our position is: Build this right, TransCanada. Or really, as somebody said, don't build it at all. "Build it right or don't build it at all." And we believe TransCanada is building this right; it's designed right, they've hired the right labor -- not because of expense or not to say the dollar -- they brought in the people necessary to build the best pipeline that technology can build. Now there is a thing that hasn't been done here, and it's really important that everybody listen; and I love the way that everybody's talked back, but there has to be a reality check on the passion that is present in this room, both from the Nebraskans and from those that are here from out-of- state. I've seen this passion before, when my Oklahoma Sooners came up here to play the Cornhuskers, every now and then, before the Huskers left our conference. But the reality is, the placement of this XL, the Keystone XL is as advantageous as any of the other alternative routes could have possibly been. You can shove it over to the east and into the drainage basin and the bottom lands of the rivers over there, or you can move it the other direction, further into the Ogallala. But the fact of the matter is if this thing leaks, it can only move east and south. At three feet a day and ten years, it would have moved only slightly more than a half a mile, if it was left unattended. This pipeline is literally a needle dropped in to a haystack that is built, has been built by the good Nebraskans that live near the Sand Hills and on them; but once that pipeline is there, given the other things that exist in this area that are part of this community and culture, that needle can neither be found nor can it be seen; it will cease to exist. Take this into account: There are 255 underground storage tanks in the Sand Hills area. Those contain 10,000 to 15,000 gallons of gasoline each. Now if they're -- on any given day, those are full, we're looking at 3.8 million gallons of gasoline floating on the Sand Hills aquifer, and don't you tell me that these USTs don't leak. I've spent my 30 years of my career looking --   
MR. MILLER: It's only because you don't want to hear it.   
MR. MILLER: Here's the other thing: There are 2250 -- There are 2250 USTs.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Can we have silence? Can we have silence. And if you can speed up your comments, because you have run out of time.  
MR. MILLER: There are 2250 USTs in Nebraska on the Ogallala Aquifer. If they're all filled at any given time, which they are, we're talking about 34 million gallons of gasoline on the aquifer. The point I want to make is: We can get our oil from this country. We can ship it to Nebraska for the farmers to use or not. But the fact of the matter is that this culture was created -- we will bring the oil here to them, but they have to have it. Thank you.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you.    
MS. HOBGOOD: Speaker No. 56.  
MR. FISHER: Thank you for the opportunity to speak. My name is Bert Fisher. I'm a geologist; I hold a Ph.D. in earth sciences from Case Western Reserve University and a bachelor's in geology and geophysics from Yale University. I've worked in the general field of environmental geosciences for 38 years, including stints with the petroleum industry. And I've spent the last 21 years really in great detail dealing with environmental issues as they pertain to hydrogeology, contamination of soil and groundwater. I've taught petroleum geology at the University of Tulsa, and still do from time to time, as well as environmental geochemistry. And I would consider myself an expert in the movement of hydrocarbons in ground water and in the remediation of hydrocarbons in soil. And I'm from Oklahoma, which is an oil producing state. I work today mainly as an expert; I do a substantial amount of expert witness work, and I'm going to have to live with whatever I say today; because when I say it again, an opposing attorney will throw it out at me if I ever reverse my feeling. Just suffice it to say that I've worked for industry and I have also worked on behalf of landowners, and in the last ten years, mainly for landowners. And also suffice it to say that when I am involved in something, that generally related to a misadventure of the oil and gas industry. Now I'll also say this, that over the past year and a half, I've worked in taking a look at pipeline construction issues across the United States, as they pertain mainly to geotechnical issues, but also to their safety. And I've done this on behalf of pipeline union Local No. 798, as an independent expert working for them. I've heard a lot of things today that I really agree with. One is that we're concerned about our environment. But I've also heard things that I don't agree with, and I don't agree with them on a technical basis. One is "the whole aquifer is at risk." It's not. The pipeline's current route is in the Northeast corner of the Ogallala Aquifer, and where it crosses the Sand Hills the gradient -- water flows down-gradient, in this case mainly downhill -- is to the east and south, away from the bulk of the aquifer. It does not endanger the drinking water supply of two million people. Number 2, that the oil is somehow from other types of oil, that it's filled with toxic materials. Well, you know, it's really very similar chemically to Mexican Mayan heavy crude or the California heavy crudes, chemically, and it would have the consistency of something like 40 or 50 weight motor oil, pretty thick stuff. And it's not going to sink into the aquifer. It's still lighter than water; it would float. And its viscosity is quite high, so it can't move very easily through the aquifer, and it's not going to mix and be miscible with water that's present in the aquifer. If there are spills, and there certain have been, most of them have been very small, as small as five gallons that have been brought out. So I'm here to tell you that this is not an unsafe pipeline; it doesn't threaten your aquifer, and it doesn't threaten the drinking water supply of two million people. Thank you.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you.    
MS. HOBGOOD: Speaker No. 57.  
MR. O'MARA: Good afternoon. My name is Mike O'Mara. I'm International Representative for United Association, representing 13,000 members in Missouri, Iowa, Nebraska and Kansas. I've also served for the past ten and half years as an elected member of St. Louis County Council, representing over 145,000 residents. The geographical boundaries of my district include Civil War Museum properties, the confluence of the Missouri and Mississippi Rivers, the Lewis and Clark Exploration Trail, and a unique area which is a geological area which consists of underground streams and caverns. We've also preserved historical communities of the early Spanish and French settlers, and designated archaeological sites, where digs still take place and numerous Native American artifacts have been uncovered. I feel it is my responsibility to represent the constituents in my community, and also to protect the environment. A major pipeline runs from Wood River, Illinois, which is just on the other side of St. Louis, over in Illinois, underneath the areas mentioned, to Lambert-St. Louis International Airport with no negative impact. The TransCanada Keystone XL project promises to create thousands of good-paying jobs, financed entirely with private funds and addresses the old-age dilemma of dependency on foreign oil. One of the questions came up about, the last couple days is: Where is this oil going? And between Venezuela and Mexico, their decreasing their supply to the United States. With our reserves, this oil will be able to keep up with those reserves and maintain the loss that we have lost through the other independents; Venezuela and Mexico. I am a fourth generation pipefitter. I have a nephew that's a fifth generation pipe fitter. I have a son that has a master's in architecture and still looking for work. I know we're on some tough times here, and I really respect the thoughts and concerns of the environment. Based on my personal background and experience with the impact of pipelines, I have no reservations in requesting the State Department to permit the TransCanada Keystone XL project to move forward. And with that, I just left the St. Louis area, and I filled up my tank two days ago, and we get fed from Conoco-Phillips over in Wood River; and I filled up my tank and it was 2.92 a gallon from the St. Louis area. With that, I appreciate, Madam Chair, your time.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you.  
MR. O'MARA: And I respect -- I want to thank Lincoln, Nebraska for their opportunity here. Thank you.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you very much.    
MS. HOBGOOD: Speaker 58.  
MR. QUICK: Good afternoon. My name is Kim Quick. I'm the president if Teamsters Local 554.  We have offices in Omaha, Lincoln, and Grand Island, Sioux City, Iowa. We're an affiliate of the International Brothers of Teamsters to speak here today in support of the Keystone XL pipeline project. There is nothing new about the pipelines in the United States except that more than a dozen interstate pipelines were built in the past five years without serious incident. Work has been completed on the Millenium project, the Towsman , the Chesapeake in the East, while the Marcellus Shale project is still underway. In the central region of the United States, work is currently being done on the Keystone, Alberta Clipper, Southern Lights, the Rocky Mountain Express and the Illinois-Ohio-Minnesota-Wisconsin- Kansas and Indiana. In the South, the Tiger pipeline runs across the states of Texas, Alabama, Louisiana and Florida. In the West, the Ruby project is being worked on through the States of Oregon, Nevada, Utah and Wyoming. These pipeline projects have brought an economic boom during the worst economy in recent history. It is expected to create over 13,000 union jobs, which will put money into local communities. Pipeline workers will pump money into local grocery stores, restaurants, convenience stores, campgrounds, motels and apartments. Pipeline companies use a tremendous amount of supplies, which much is procured locally including fuel, concrete, gravel and waste removal. Pipeline projects help balance state and local budgets by throwing off considerable tax revenue. The Keystone XL project is projected to provide more than $5.2 billion in tax revenue to the states along the Keystone corridor. The project is in our national interest as well as our local interest; it will improve America's security by providing a stable energy supply with a friendly, reliable neighbor, Canada. The pipeline will be constructed using industry best practices, and will meet or exceed all existing pipeline regulation standards. Thank you.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you.    
MS. HOBGOOD: Speaker No. 59.  
VOICE: I'm Speaker 60, if 59 doesn't show up.  
MS. HOBGOOD: You may proceed.  
MR. GERHARD: All right. I'm Bill Gerhard, I'm a member of the Laborers International Union of North America. I want to speak today, I know a lot has been said on both sides of the subject. I just want to talk about my personal experience on the pipeline. I was a business manager in the Laborers local in the early Eighties, and if we can go back to the Eighties, I know a lot of people in here weren't even born in the Eighties, but we are in the depths of Reaganomics and the trickle-down theory. Unemployment was in double-digit in construction; it was 40 percent. We received free cheese from the government to make sure that we didn't starve. I was fortunate enough to have a pipeline come through my jurisdiction. We had hundreds of laborers working on that project; there were hundreds of fitters and welders and welder's helpers; a hundred operating engineers, a hundred Teamsters. It was an economic boom. And the most encouraging thing was to see the looks on people's faces when they went out to work, knowing they were going to be working six ten hour days, they were going to get paid well, they were going to have health insurance, and they were going to have a pension. It made a lot of families healthy, it made a lot of the communities around my hometown healthy, too. I just want to clear up something that was said earlier. In construction we don't consider these short term or temporary or part-time jobs; we consider these construction jobs. For anyone in construction knows that the minute you walk on the job, you're actually working to put yourself out of work, because once that project's done, you move on to another project. So I want to thank you for your time and me being here to speak. Thank you.    
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker No. 61.   
MS. HOBGOOD: Speaker No. 62, you may proceed.  
MR. LATIMERR: Good afternoon and welcome to Lincoln, Nebraska. I trust you'll enjoy your time in the state. My name is Robert Latimerr, and I'm a proud employee of TransCanada, I'm happy to say that. I've lived in Nebraska three years, I moved here from the State of Oregon, and I moved to the U.S. in 2001. Previously I worked in the gas pipeline industry in the province of Alberta, had a brother that actually worked at the tar sands, oil sands operation at Syncrude in Northeastern Alberta. I know a little bit about the oil and gas business. I get a little concerned when we start running down Canada here at this forum. As a resident of the United States here for the last ten years, I look at Canada as a friendly nation, the longest undefended border in the world; an ally in World War II, Korea -- and I'll let you know, an ally in Afghanistan where Canada has shed much blood of their soldiers and their diplomats in fighting the battle of terrorism over there with Americans and other NATO forces.    Energy security. Energy coming from Canada, a reliable, safe, secure supply. I believe it's in the national interest of the United States and the people of Nebraska to proceed with this pipeline. That's all I have to say.    
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker No. 63.  
MR. BOZEK: My name is David Bozek, and I'm a resident of Omaha, Nebraska. I support the Keystone XL people because of its benefits to Nebraska and the nation. The Keystone XL pipeline will contribute to our nation's energy security, which is more critical than ever, given today's rural economy and the instability around the globe. Canada is our neighbor, our ally, and will supply a stable supply of energy from a democratic country with high environmental and safety standards. Canadian oil reduces our dependence on foreign oil from countries that are hostile to our nation, our democracy and freedom. The State Department has completed an exhaustive environmental impact statement which has concluded that none of our nation's precious natural resources will be adversely affected. Of the many routes evaluated by this review, it was determined that the Keystone XL is the best alternative. Alternative routes are found to disturb more land, cross more waterways and cause more disruption for all involved. Finally, the XL pipeline will create thousands of jobs, generate millions in tax revenue for Nebraska alone, and will not require any taxpayer-funded dollars. Often in heated discussions, only the most vocal or those with political clout are allowed to be heard. I thank the State Department for allowing an individual voice to appear today. I ask the State Department grant approval for the Keystone XL as soon as possible. Thank you, and God bless America.    
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker No. 64.  
MR. GROSS: I'm Jon Gross, licensed geologist in the State of Nebraska. I'm a native, Nebraskan, western Butler County, and a Doane College graduate, and I received my master's degree from the University of Nebraska in geology in Lincoln. I'm not a pipeline expert, but for the past 25 years, I've been involved with leaking underground storage tanks, both in regulatory and in private geological environmental groundwater investigations, relating to releases of petroleum hydrocarbons in the subsurface. In 1986, the Nebraska Legislature passed the Petroleum Products and Hazardous Substances Storage and Handling Act. This is the statute that required the State Fire Marshal's Office in Nebraska to regulate underground storage tanks through the registration, leak detection, upgrades, proper installation and reporting. I was the manager of this underground storage tank division of the State Fire Marshals for four years, and during those four years we discovered many releases mainly caused by bare steel tanks or bare steel piping in the ground that were not cathodically protected. Other things, environmentally sensitive areas. In an installation of new tanks near a public water supply, we have regulation that required secondary containment of underground storage tanks; it was within 500 feet of a public water supply. Other regulations, we were challenging for us, we're waste oil tanks, and heavy fuel oils like No. 6 fuel that had to be heated in order to be pumped through. How do you monitor something like that to determine if it leaks, and if it did leak, where would it go? Once a release is reported to the State Fire Marshall, the Department of Environmental Quality in Nebraska, the NDQ requires the investigation, remediation and site closure phases, if necessary. In the early 2000s, after underground storage tanks were either upgraded or replaced, Nebraska had well over 5,000 sites with reported releases. Several hundred of these releases were at locations over the Ogallala formation and well over 1,000 of these were over the High Plains Aquifer. Some of the worst UST releases are not the big volume overfills, but instead the slow leaks that can't be detected through release detection. One drop a second from an underground storage tank, a gasoline tank, is approximately one gallon a day, 365 gallons a year or over 3600 gallons in a ten year period. And once gasoline or diesel fuel is released, it will travel downward to the soils until it encounters an impervious layer or groundwater. In groundwater it will migrate in the direction of groundwater flow. Gasoline contamination is characterized by BTX concentrations, which stands for benzene, toluene, ethyl benzene and xylenes. And a dissolved benzene plume is the most critical because it travels further than any other constituents, and benzene is also a known carcinogen. The MCL of drinking water is 5 micrograms per liter, or 5 parts per billion. In the sands of Nebraska's Elkhorn -- all right. Our company has been involved with dozens of less sites over the Ogallala Aquifer and some of these sites in the Sand Hills region. The depth of groundwater ranges from less than five feet to someplace over 100 feet in others. Although the groundwater has been impacted at all these sites, the groundwater is above the Ogallala Aquifer. None of our groundwater monitoring wells penetrate the Ogallala formation, because they're encountered by saturated groundwater. Thanks.    
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker No. 65.   
MS. HOBGOOD: Speaker No. 66.  
MR. HENDRICKS: Thank you. My name is Danny Hendricks. I'm the business manager of Pipeliners Local Union 798 and I represent over 6800 members nationwide. It is the organization comprised of the most highly trained pipeline constructors in the world, and we will be instrumental in constructing the Keystone XL. If you're going to build it, you need to build it right. Where skilled labor is used, TransCanada's commitment to building the best pipeline possible is assured. Hopefully before we leave here today you will understand the importance of this project, not only from a national security standpoint but as a common sense approach. We've had the privilege to work with TransCanada for the last three years on the original Keystone pipeline project, that was finished on time, under budget, and with full compliance with all federal, state and environmental laws. Build it, but build it right. Many of the remarks from the opposition of the Keystone XL are about what-if. You know, as a group of pipeliners, we've built lots of mega- projects, much larger than this; the Rex project, 1700 miles of 36-inch and 42-inch. The Alliance pipeline, 886 miles of 36-inch. The Vector, 350 miles of 42-inch. The Ruby, 680 miles of 42-inch, and the Alaska pipeline. All of these projects met with the same opposition and many of the same what-ifs. All of these mega-projects involve geographical obstacles and challenges thought to be insurmountable to the naysayers, much more than the aquifer. But through proper planning and advanced engineering today, they all quietly lay in the ground, performing as a conduit of energy for America's needs; built and built right. But you know really the most important part for me is not about the jobs, even though it would employ my members. The most important point for me is this: We're going to continue to buy oil in this country, at least for the next 10, 15, 20 years. Now we have an option of where we're going to buy it from. If we continue to transfer the wealth out of this country into OPEC countries that finance wars against this country, we're doomed to fail, period. It's going out at a million dollars a minute. That's how much money we send to OPEC; a million dollars a minute. Fact check it: It's a half a trillion dollars a year. Nobody can afford that, environmentalists can't afford it, labor can't afford it, America can't afford it. When you buy oil from OPEC countries, you buy a barrel of oil and a barrel of problems. We don't need that. When you buy from Canada, they share in our economy. Ninety percent of their people live within a hundred miles of our border. They are part of this economy; they are part of the solution. And Madam Chairman, I stand here today and I say we support Keystone XL pipeline and we need that permit.    
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker No. 67. Speaker No. 67. Speaker No. 68. Speaker No. 69. DR. DOLEZAL; Thank you for being here, and welcome to Nebraska. My name is Dr. Doug Dolezal, and I'm here to speak in favor of the TransCanada Keystone XL pipeline. I'm a lifelong resident of Nebraska, born and raised on a farm northwest of Lincoln. I attended the University of Nebraska-Lincoln where I earned my three degrees. After 33 years, I recently retired from teaching high school mathematics, coaching and teaching college math methods. As a former teacher, I am concerned about our schools losing school aid. Construction of the pipeline and then its operation will result in additional property taxes estimated in excess of $150 million, and will create a substantial number of jobs which will also a have a significant positive impact on our local school districts. As I was growing up, my parents and grandparents instilled in me the importance of analyzing the situation before making a decision. Being a math person naturally, this followed with what I was taught. And after analyzing this situation, I'm in favor of the pipeline despite what some people are saying. Some people say that the pipeline is not safe and is an accident waiting to happen. Can any one of us be one hundred percent sure that when we leave here today we won't be involved in a traffic accident? We hope that we won't, but are we really prepared if something does happen? The Keystone XL pipeline has a detailed emergency response plan in place that will be filed with the U.S. Department of Transportation Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration. Safeguards will be in place, and plans are ready in that very rare chance that anything happens. Keystone XL is prepared. People are concerned that if there is a spill, the oil will pollute the Ogallala Aquifer. It is my understanding that most of the aquifer is at least 100 feet below ground level. Which means that through most of Nebraska, the oil is going to have to pass through several layers of rock, sand and clay before getting to the aquifer. Now any of you who have ever farmed clay ground know oil is not going to go through clay. Water sure doesn't. Where the aquifer is closer to ground level, plans are in place to encase the people in a concrete coating to prevent any contamination. Oil will not get to the aquifer. If it does, studies have shown that it will not go far. Still other people say that a spill will contaminate the entire aquifer. Even though the oil will not reach the aquifer, contaminating the entire aquifer is physically impossible. Since the aquifer slopes down to the east, we all know that water does not move up hill. Any of the aquifer up-slope of where the spill occurs cannot be contaminated. Yet others are unaware that we currently have almost 21,000 miles of pipelines crossing Nebraska, including nearly 3000 miles of hazardous liquid pipelines. They have coexisted with the Ogallala Aquifer for decades without harmful impact. And don't forget that oil wells have been drilled and are in production within areas overlying the Ogallala Aquifer, including West Nebraska.  Thank you for your time.    
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker No. 70.  
DR. PIPHER: Good afternoon. Thank you for being here. I've listened to every speaker before me and I've got a couple of quick reactions before I say a couple of things. First off, I have liked every Canadian that I have ever met.  Secondly, and I think that you guys have probably noticed this, I've been hit with the process that you've put in place here today, and I've noted that most of the speakers today haven't been extremists, they haven't been radicals, they haven't been crazies; they've been good, decent citizens; students, teachers, pipefitters here to try to something for their country and their families, and I think that's great. My name is Jim Pipher, and I've come to ask you to take the long view. I've lived my whole life in Nebraska, my children and grandchildren all live in Nebraska; my parents and grandparents all lived in Nebraska. And when you guys first came here and you thought about Nebraska, maybe you thought about corn and football -- I'm guessing by now -- you think about water. As Senator Ben Nelson said when he was governor, "Water is the lifeblood of our state."    We've seen lots of ads and heard lots of words talking about money, jobs, oil, the economy, and national security. When it comes to national security, nothing is more basic, elemental and crucial than water.    It would be a real drag that if I had to, I could go a week without driving my car; maybe I'd borrow the mule that you could loan me -- but I can't go a week without drinking water.    I'm asking you to take the long view. Should this pipeline be built, it will be here a long, long time. It will be here long after I'm dead and buried; it will be here long after many of the people who have built it are dead and buried. It will be here for my great grandchildren, who I may not meet. You guys look kind of young, I hope you have children, maybe you don't have grandchildren yet. If not, maybe sometime in the future. Take the long view. Your decision boils down to time and priorities. Stated simply, our water is too valuable and necessary and important to risk; and when I say risk, no scientist, no engineer, no human being can unequivocally stand here and give an 100 percent guarantee that problems aren't going to occur.    Without water, our security and well-being is lost. Say no to this pipeline.    
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker No. 71.  
MS. FISHER: Okay. I'm not really good at speaking, public speaking, and I had a speech all prepared, but I'm going to just throw it out the window. Most of the people have already talked about things that I was concerned about; but there was a gentleman that left earlier that was really upset that he couldn't stick around all day to say what he wanted to say. So I'm going to read an article out of the Lincoln Journal Star that was September 10th, 2011. And it's an article by Robert White, and it must have been a news article off the wire from Los Angeles Times. And it says, Rising fuel exports keep U.S. gas prices from falling. Oil prices have fallen, but U.S. drivers aren't benefiting because the national refineries continue to boost exports, while reducing supplies available domestically. The result could be seen in the Energy Department's weekly survey of service stations around the United States nationally, and the Energy Department said the average price claimed 4.7 percent a gallon to 3.6 percent in the past week. Anyway, I'm going to skip that part. But it said -- The U.S. petroleum balance of trade continues to shift in a change that it is both literal and figurative, said Tom Kozel, Chief of Oil Analysis for the Oil Price Information Service. For the tenth week in a row, Energy Department numbers show that the country exported conservatively more refined product cargos than were imported. Now that seems kind of weird to me, but. Much of the refined product involved exports in diesel, Kohl said, meaning refineries are devoting more of their production to that fuel at the expense of gasoline. The customers mostly are in Central America and South America. Why are we exporting oil? If we have to resort to having this pipeline coming through our country. It's not oil for America. It's going to be oil that's going to be shipped out on the open market.    We're not upset with Canadians; TransCanada isn't Canadians. TransCanada is going to be transporting oil that's going to come from all the other forest that's going to be dug up that has investors from China and other foreign countries that have already went in and bought all the leases. And they're going to be using that pipeline to transport that oil down to our refineries and putting us at risk.    It's not there. Thank you.    
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker No. 72.  
DR. RICE: Good evening. I am Dr. Juanita Rice. I'm a retired university professor, but I'm not an egghead or an elitist or an intellectual; I come from a farming and working class background. I live in Nebraska, I'm here to speak for the people. I wasn't paid, I wasn't shipped in, I'm not speaking for anybody else.    I am opposed to the pipeline, and the reason I want to speak is that I am not just opposed to the particular route; I know that that is important, and many people have addressed that. But I want to talk about the overall global picture. I can't bring you photographs of the devastation that so-called tar sands mining cause. But you can find some, and I wish you would. The tar sands are the largest industrial project on the face of the earth. The tar sands displace an area the size of Vancouver Island now, and will grow to consume an area the size of the State of Florida. The tailings ponds are so huge that a few of them can already be seen from outer space. Then imagine yourself there, standing on a mountainous toxic dam in full hazmat protective gear, necessarily; inside your gas mask with tailing sands skidding across your goggles, and staring out at a poisonous tailings pond miles long, no end in sight. According to U.S. legislation from 2007, such oil as is exported from the tar sands, is illegal for the U.S. to buy or sell. Allowing it a free ticket, therefore, to flow via pipeline across our country is like allowing cocaine or methamphetamine to be carried across the country if Canada legalized it.    They said they're willing to take care of it. But what can that mean in a year, in a couple of years that have seen BP spill in the Gulf, have seen the disaster in Japan, the disaster in the Yellowstone River right now, in the Kalamazoo River. How can you take care of that?    Moreover, and I guess this will be my last point: I'm speaking for some non-people here today. I love America not just for its human beings and its money and its prosperity and its energy, but also for the animals and wildlife that surround us.    We are in the central flyway -- some species of birds, 100 percent of those species go right through the Rainwater Basin where I'm from. That is important. Caribou may be extinct in Alberta in 30 years. Thank you.    
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker 73.  
MR. BOETTCHER: Bruce Boettcher, fourth generation rancher. We as Nebraskans and Americans are humanitarians. We feed the world. This is the breadbasket of America, where the Ogallala Aquifer is located. When contaminated, we will be the ones who need humanitarian aid. This is a Canadian project and it needs to stay in Canadian soil as long and as far as possible.    Let Canada assume more risk of their vital ground. If this is not possible, then this project needs to be scrapped. I'm appalled to think you politicians would consider letting a toxic pipeline of this stature cross a vital natural resource as the Ogallala Aquifer, and that the EPA has no wrong findings. Evidently, a leak in the pipeline has no impact on the environment. I'm a rancher who works with metal and safety switches every day. Safety switches fail. Metal cracks, breaks, and wears out. TransCanada claims this pipeline would be safe. The safest mechanism would be to go around the Ogallala Aquifer.    TransCanada needs to show respect to Americans on American soil, instead of bullying, bribing and soliciting eminent domain to our people to get what they want.    This is our soil. We need to tell them where the pipeline goes instead of them telling us where the people goes.    Common sense should tell you it needs to lay alongside the other pipeline. So it's easily and readily watched over. But they can bribe for new easements and throw money at football, county fairs, state fairs, TV ads, radio ads to smooth over the public. With all that being said, I think they would have had enough money to go around. In my professional opinion, this pipeline is not in the best interests of the American people. This is not about jobs, revenue or other hardball; it's about the water. The American people's water.    
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker 74.  
MR. BOETTCHER: I'm Scott Boettcher, a fourth generation rancher, too, that lives in the Sand Hills of Nebraska, and I'm not a public speaker. This pipeline does not cross me, but we all need to be concerned and speak out. I call this 36-inch big Keystone pipeline an experimental project, and it is driven by dollar signs that Keystone waves in front of us. This is a big pipe buried in our wetlands, and it will float. If you're very still, add cement, heat it up, put it under extreme pressure for miles in our wetlands, and then add man's one percent of flaws into building it, it will leak. This is definitely an experimental project. No one will know for sure until it's in place, and then the inevitable happens: Our water is contaminated, our land is ruined, people are relocated and our land values are lost. Who would want to buy property that has a spill or a pipeline this big running through it? I sure wouldn't.    For the people who want these union jobs, they should get on our side. Protecting our groundwater and going around the Ogallala Aquifer will lead to more pay and time in their pockets. And if it's 250 miles or more to go around, it's a small price to pay to save a natural resource.    And Keystone has the route in place already with the first line. As far as nonunion jobs that would be created when in place it might be building in fences and moving the port-a-potties for a limited amount of time. Keystone's tactics of trying to hurry and pressure people to sign easements before they legally have the government's approval tells me this is an untrustworthy salesman trying to sell the public into something we don't want --    -- but to save them money by going the shortest route, not being able to disclose their settlements with individuals is unbelievable, too. If I give $10,000 for a bowl or $1,000 an acre for some pastureland, the public knows or can find out, so why do they have these secret deals?    Personally, I don't care what they paid out, but I wouldn't want it on my ground at any price. It will devaluate our land. We're cracking down on bullying in our schools, but it seems Keystone can keep -- bullying the public into what they want and tell you it's for the betterment of the people and our country, when really the Canadians will be the winners and we'll be the losers of our natural resource.    Someone locally said the Ogallala Aquifer is as unique as the Grand Canyon or Yellowstone Park. This is a good reason not to disrupt something that gives us pure, clean drinking water. And even though no one driving down our roads or flying over can see it. As the world population continues to grow, fuel may be less of a necessity than clean drinking water to sustain life. Let's protect what was given to us by rerouting the pipeline. There has to be alternate routes and different ways of moving foreign oil into the open world's market.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you.    
MS. HOBGOOD: Speaker No. 75.  
MR. FRISCH: My name is Terry Frisch, a landowner. I live approximately one and a half miles south of Atkinson, Nebraska on Highway 11. The Elkhorn River flows through the north side of our land. A creek called Dry Creek flows through the middle to the southwest of our land. My main concern is the pumping station that will be located 10 to 12 miles west-southwest of our place, which would be built in a sub-irrigated meadow. When they get to leak, which is widely known to happen, it ill flow to the east into a lake known as Parkey's Lake. From there it will flow through meadows, pastures and wetlands, spreading out to cover several hundred acres before converging to form the head of Dry Creek, which is approximately three miles west of Highway 11, flowing easterly through our land. It flows close enough to us to be able to stand in my corals and cast a fishing rod in the creek. From there it proceeds approximately one and a half miles on east, but enters the Elkhorn River, which eventually flows into the Missouri River. Our biggest fear is water and land contamination. When a problem happens around the pumping station, plus the fact that Keystone I has had 14 leaks in its first year of operation, with the North Dakota spill in May being 500 barrels does not give us much faith in the safety and construction standards of TransCanada. In closing, you elected officials that have the final say will be held accountable for future generations to come. You people have to find a safer route for this pipeline. Thank you.    
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker No. 76.  
MR. GOTSCHALL: Hello. My name is Ben Gotschall. In addition to being a fourth generation rancher who grew up in the Sand Hills where my family still lives, I'm also a part-time Director of Pipeline Outreach for Bold Nebraska. I'm also District 5 President of the Nebraska Farmers Union, an organization that represents over 5300 family farmers and ranchers in this State. And part of my job as Pipeline Outreach Director, I've seen the pipeline route from Texas to Nebraska, and I've visited with landowners from Montana, North Dakota, South Dakota and Nebraska, Kansas, Oklahoma and Texas not only on the existing Keystone I route but also along the proposed Keystone XL route. The main concern I have here is with the contents of the pipe and its threat to the Ogallala Aquifer, particularly the area of the recharge zone in Holt County, very near to where I grew up; and I share those concerns with Dr. James Goedecke of UNL, according to testimony that he gave to the Nebraska Legislature last year. This diluted bitumen, as it's referred to in the FEIS and as it is, can be called by other names such as crude oil, but it is an unknown substance. There are no MSDS sheets on this substance in the FEIS, and there are no known studies that have been performed on its effects to ground water. Like Dr. Goeke and other professors at UNL such as Dr. John Gates, I believe that this substance's performance in an aquifer should be studied, and I don't think we should compare the studies to studies done in Bemidji, Minnesota, which is 500 miles away from here, when our own scientists are telling us that the Ogallala Aquifer varies so greatly just ten feet away from the pipeline that generalized statements such as the one made by Ms. Heidi Tulquist earlier about the purported safety of this project, can't be verified as fact.    Again, I'd like to say, we have no problem with Canada here in this country, to speak to an earlier remark. We have a problem here with a company called TransCanada.    And for all you folks who came here to support TransCanada and want a piece of their pie-in- the-sky that they're trying to sell you, I want to read from TransCanada's statement on forward-looking information that accompanies all of TransCanada's press releases. This news release may contain certain information that is forward-looking and is subject to important risks and uncertainties. By its nature, forward- looking information is subject to various risks and uncertainties which could cause TransCanada's actual results and experience to differ materially from the anticipated results or expectations expressed. Readers are cautioned to not place undue reliance on this forward- looking information which is given as of the date it is expressed in this news release, or otherwise, and not to use future-oriented information or financial outlooks for anything other than their intended purpose. TransCanada undertakes no obligation to update publicly or revise any forward-looking information whether as a result of new information, future events, or otherwise except as required by law. I do not trust TransCanada, and neither should you.    
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker No. 77.  
MR. GENUNG: Thank you. My name is Tom Genung. My wife, Kathy and I grew up in Holt County, Nebraska. Before I get started, you may have noticed that a lot of us are wearing Husker red today.    That's in honor, if it hasn't been mentioned, that's in honor of the decision that Tom Osborne made to discontinue the advertisements on the HuskerVision.    I'm going to be pretty brief because we've heard a lot of good things today. I agree with everybody that's spoken in reference to the disagreement that TransCanada should build a pipeline through the Sand Hills. I absolutely agree with that. The reason that I'm here, like I said my wife and I grew up in Holt County, Nebraska. My mother-in-law's land is directly affected by the proposed route. The tactics used by TransCanada to acquire these easements is despicable.    Without a doubt, the word 'bullying' does fit the situation. The proposed XL pipeline is not in the nation's best interest, and contributes not to fossil fuel reduction. The paradigm of renewable energy must be embraced, creating economic improvements this consider needs and wants. That takes care of the job situation. Once again, do not allow the XL pipeline to cross the Nebraska Sand Hills and the Ogallala Aquifer. Thank you for your time.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you.    
MS. HOBGOOD: Speaker 78.  
MR. O'DONNELL: Hello. My name is Jeff O'Donnell, and I am from Nebraska. I didn't get bused or flown in here, either. I'm here to speak on behalf of myself and my 12 year old daughter, our friends and family. I am in opposition to the acceptance of the XL pipeline as being in the national or Nebraska interest. I would ask, how and when did the State Department become superior to the EPA and science in determining environmental worthiness?    When did the sovereign rights of this country and its citizens become subject to the whims of multinational corporate interests?    When I hear speakers embracing the alleged positive economic impact, I must remind them of all the balloons that we have seen burst economically. When I hear them speak of minimal danger to the Ogallala Aquifer, I want to know how much toxicity they are willing to have their children drink in their water, ingest in their food and milk and bathe and swim in.    If this pipeline is so important, why not build this pipeline across Canada? If this pipeline is so important, why must it be across the aquifer instead of complementing the pipeline that already exists across more eastern Nebraska? Wouldn't it then be easier to build a safety culvert of such that would safeguard the two? I heard the statements about making our nation more secure by ensuring a friendlier supplier of oil. Really? A loaded and cocked gun aimed at the aquifer that powers America's agricultural engine, and I'm supposed to feel more secure?    I find it hard to recognize some of these speakers as not being paid or corporate speakers, or even as Nebraskans; I hear the toxicologist's statement about the safety and low risk -- she must be highly trusted by the TransCanada labs, because information on the substances used to frack up these oil sands are not publicly available. But they will be part and parcel of every gallon transported through the pipeline. I also have to ask where the State Department's IG is as to the chumminess of several of the Department's officers and the lobbyists and executives of Keystone's backers. I know that if this were several of the federal agencies administering funds to U.S. cities, they are barred from, by law, from said gracious assistance and accommodation that has been shown and reported by numerous newspapers. I do not trust secret meetings, unlicensed realty agreements, and foreign corporations that can hide behind national borders and corporate shuffling with future of this resource. I am a U.S. Army veteran, faithful voter, and a very concerned parent. And I ask that this proposed pipeline not be approved. I note that the supporters of Keystone XL have embraced the color orange; and that is fitting, for orange is the color of warning signs. And we should be warned --    -- that this is not a safe approach. The technology does not exist to clean up, let alone contain the contamination that a leap of this pipeline would engender. Thank you.    
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker No. 79.  
MR. SYDOW: Now good evening, Madam Chair. My name is Bill Sydow, I live in Sidney, Nebraska. I'm speaking on behalf of the Nebraska Oil and Gas Conservation Commission. Our commission is an independent state agency which regulates the exploration and production and development of crude oil and natural gas here in our State of Nebraska. I serve as the Director of that agency.   
MR. SYDOW: For myself personally, I'm a native Nebraskan, I'm a geological engineer by degree and a petroleum engineer by training and experience. I've worked in the oil and gas industry for 34 years,  I'm in my 17th year here, back home in Nebraska at our Commission. Our Commission recommends the approval of the Keystone XL pipeline on its current route without reservation, for a number of reasons. I want to address four points quickly today in the areas of crude oil and its properties. I think there's great misunderstanding. The location and production of oil and gas here in our state, on the Ogallala Aquifer; the location of existing oil and gas pipelines, and briefly in the national interest of both supply of security. First, a few facts about crude oil. Crude oil is a naturally-occurring vital natural resource, and it should never be considered as hazardous. Men and women have around crude oil since --  -- Men and women have around crude oil since 1859, and we have mechanics that daily are around oils, and it is not a harmful material. The degraded crude oil or bitumen in Northern Alberta, in fact where they mine it, serves as the base of the fresh water aquifer system, and the oil and water are in contact there. That bitumen is upgraded, and this crude oil will have a specific gravity of around 32 degrees API, which equates to about 86 percent of the density of water. In fact, it will float on water. And that is very similar to the crude oils that we produce in Southwest Nebraska. All crude oil has a natural viscosity or thickness which was spoken of. Crude oils in this 32 degree API range will not sink to any appreciable depth in the soil profile, both due to its viscosity and its surface tension effects. So that means that crude oil is basically incapable of migrating any particular depth to the water table, if it's at a certain depth; and that is unlike water or gasoline or diesel or any other of the less viscous liquids. One gentleman here today said that oil and water don't mix; that's true, because crude oil is insoluble in water and it cannot chemically degrade any groundwater. Secondly, I want to speak to where we produce the majority of our oil and gas here in Nebraska. And for those who don't know, we produce oil and gas in three areas of our state; in the Southeast, in the Southwest and in the Panhandle of our State. The Western and Southwestern portions we produce nearly 500 million barrels of oil from approximately 5,000 wells, since probably 1949 out there, on top of the Ogallala Aquifer without any contamination to that. And the aquifer is huge, but we produce oil and gas from 100,000 wells at this time, is not contaminating any aquifer. We still have remaining reserve potential in the state that underlies the aquifer, and we will continue to regulate and safely explore for oil and gas there in the future. Can I have a little more time? Okay.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker No. 80.  
MS. GABIG: Hi, I'm Kathryn Gabig. I live in Lincoln, but I'm from Baltimore -- I think you're familiar with that town. I will state I am a liberal. I'm an environmentalist. And I'm a tree hugger. I'm really concerned about what we're doing with the planet and how we're passing on all of this dirty stuff to our children. We can't undo this. And that 12-year old girl that spoke earlier was very articulate, and I don't think I can really top what she said. I had a husband who was very involved in environmental issues and conservation and wildlife, and he's not here to speak anymore, but I feel very strongly that we have to step up to the plate and be truthful about this. We love Canadians. They have a great sense of humor, they have that funny little way of saying "out" and "garage"; and this isn't about Canadian people, this is about an oil company, a mega-corporation --    -- whose bottom line is what they're interested in. They're not interested in the Sand Hills, they're not interested in the aquifer. They're not interested in our children and our grandchildren. Please, if you have a chance to get to the Sand Hills, you will be absolutely blown away by that area. It is so gorgeous. And that's what it takes; people need to see this area and understand what we may lose. Water is the next big problem. Please, please, do not go with this. Thank you.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you.    
MS. HOBGOOD: Speaker No. 81.  
MS. LANGAN: Good afternoon. My name is Marian Langan, and I'm the Director of Audubon Nebraska, and today I'm speaking on behalf of thousands of members of Audubon Nebraska, many of whom are in the room today. Many things have been said regarding the pipeline, so I'm going to divert from what I was originally going to say. But the one thing that I do want to add for you is a picture of the conditions on the ground up in parts of the Sand Hills. And we've heard a lot of discussion today about the depth of the groundwater, whether it's going to move, all of that; and it's a little bit confusing. But this spring I was up there, along the route, standing, looking at the meadow where, one of the spots where the pipeline is going to go through. And there's water, there's ducks, it's this beautiful, incredible landscape. But as you start watching it, you know, there's water going that way - - and then there's water going this way. And it's the groundwater at the surface, and then it's going down there and then there's water going back into the ground. And over there's water coming up because it's actually under pressure; there's artesian wells there, and so the water's coming up. Unbelievably beautiful landscape. But then you think about or possible circumstance for that landscape, and that is that earlier gentleman said, one drop per second of oil, these undetectable leaks. One gallon a day. Coming up and going that way, then it goes that way, and then there's pieces that go down. We don't know what the chemicals are in that mix. We don't know how that stuff is diluted. And my friend Cindy lives a mile east of the pipeline route; it doesn't give her any comfort to know that that might just migrate East, and it's certainly not going to be helpful to her grandkids when one of them comes down with cancer because of the water they drank.    It's coming directly out of the ground, and they're drinking it. There's no filter, there's no anything. it's directly what they're drinking. We've got to move, at the very least move this pipeline, if not stop it altogether. Please deny the permit.    
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker 83.  
MS. NELSON: Good afternoon. I'm Nina Nelson from Clarks, Nebraska. That's located almost in the center of the state. And we've heard a lot today, a lot that were sort of given a knee-jerk reaction out of fear. Well, we are fearful, we are fearful for the future for ourselves and our families. But I'd like to think that we're also smart enough that most of us have done our research. We haven't just read the TransCanada ad in the newspaper and shown up; we've been studying this for months and years.    I notice that you have bottled water on the table; that shows that you can't even live part of a day without water, probably; and neither can we. I think we've all come to realize that for too long we've taken water for granted; we run over, we turn a tap, and we just have all the water we need, whether it's to drink, tape a shower, make a cup of coffee, wash the car. But there's important things in Nebraska that we do for water every day, and we use them; and my husband has spent a lot of his personal time just putting together some hard facts and figures about the importance of water to the ag economy in our area. We happen to live just less than 15 miles from where this pipeline would go through unless it's moved. And we're very fearful that this would impact the water in our own home place. But did you know that on any given day, Nebraska alone has over two and a half million cattle just in the feed lots? And they consume 5 gallons of water a day; that's almost 13 million gallons of water a day just for cattle in feed lots. Up in the Sand Hills we have three main counties; Cherry, Holt and Custer that have a lot of range cattle. In talking with some people in their association, they estimate over 300,000 cattle are out on that range every day, and the main supply of their water is the Ogallala Aquifer, just as that lady has just told you. And as you travel to Atkinson in a couple of days, if you are the ones that are going, you'll see them. Another main income for Nebraska, not just the people working in the ethanol plants but the towns around them, this is a big payroll. And each plant uses approximately one million gallons of water per day. We also have meat packing plants in Nebraska. I bet you'd be shocked to know that over in just Grand Island, at one plant they kill over 5200 head of cattle a day. That's a lot of livestock. And they tell us that they use two and a half to three million gallons of water per shift. That's a lot of water. Water currently covers 70 percent of the earth, if we look at the oceans and everything; and yet out of all that water, only two and a half percent is fresh water that can be used for cooking or drinking or our animals.    You know, if we had a source of gold -- well, I'd just like to say -- of course, I oppose the aquifer being endangered. I ask you to just not let this pipeline go through anywhere close to it.    
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker No. 84.  
MISS WINSTON: My name is Helen Winston, I'm 14 years old, and I am from Omaha, Nebraska. I represent the Sierra Club, Miller South High School Environmental Club, and the cofounder of Patriots for Nebraska, and I am the campus organizer for the student coalition for the Sierra Club. I do not stand before you as some brainwashed hippie child. I stand before you as a freethinking young adult. I stand before you as a representative of the hundreds of outraged young people who could not make it today.    I represent the future of not just Nebraska but the future of America. We don't see a future with the pipeline. We don't see a future of an America still reliant upon filthy oil. We don't see a future where farmers are bullied for their lands while the government just stands and watches.    We see a future with windmills, solar panels and hydroelectricity. We see cars running on hydrogen. We see clean air in the big cities. None of that can happen if we use this crutch, this atrocity that is the pipeline. I want to have the 90 years of the rest of my life to be spent drinking clean water, breathing clean air, and living in a clean Nebraska.    So when you make your decision, I want you to not just consider your future; I want you to consider my future, the future of the hundreds of people whom I represent, and the billions and billions who come afterwards. Remember me, and remember the kids who I represent. To quote Star Trek: The needs of many outweigh the needs of the few. We, the future, are many. And the rest of the people, they are few.    
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker No. 85.  
MR. NELSON: My name is Max L. Nelson, I'm from Clarks, Nebraska, and I oppose the Keystone XL pipeline. I come here today as a lifelong citizen of Nebraska. I am a retired farmer who has enjoyed Nebraska-the good life for 84 years, and I want to see the good life continue on for more years for my children and grandchildren. Therefore, I am totally opposed to the proposed XL pipeline that would tear up our rich agriculture farmland and would endanger our precious water supply, the Ogallala Aquifer. I have been following the proposal for many months and have a lot of personal research on TransCanada tar sands oil. Tar sands oil, not crude oil.    And the poisonous substance that would be added to the oil to get it to move through the pipeline. TransCanada is so quick to say "it will not pose a problem"; yet they also admit that leaks up to 2 percent might not be detected. You now what 2 percent of 700,000 barrels per day equals to 14,000 barrels that might be spilled before anybody even knows it?    I truly believe the Keystone XL pipeline is a front for terrorism against the United States. I don't know. I don't know who is putting up the money, but TransCanada could have built or maybe two refineries in Canada for the money they have spent in the United States trying to poison our water supply. Two years ago they poisoned a fair amount of water in Michigan when a leak occurred in the Kalamazoo River, but thanks be to God, it didn't get into the Great Lakes; or as of yet anyway, for the leak is not fully cleaned up to this day. I want to say one thing about that: They're not cleaning it up, they're covering it up.    A fellow was up there the other day, and it was in a creek, and instead of cleaning it up, they were covering it up with gravel and sand. And where it was on the grass, they were putting other stuff. So that's going to be there for years and years. Now, if they could poison the Ogallala Aquifer, it could ruin the central part of the United States. A country without water other than rain water cannot produce enough food to feed its people, let alone people in other parts of the world.    I was in China in 1946 when the people were governed by war lords. I saw people dying in the street from lack of water and food. It was a short time after I left that communism moved in and took over the country and the people approved. If someone provides you food and water, they are your best friends. Is that what TransCanada money is trying to do to us? It won't happen. There would be a war to save our water and food before we are brought to our knees by a foreign entity.    Maybe this sounds farfetched to some, but the United States to be on the alert for all types of terrorism; not just screening the airports, and the ones we heard about in our daily newspaper. Let's don't be the farmer who watched the door to the hen house while the fox was moving in the window.    
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker No. 86.  
MR. SCHREIBER: Good afternoon, my name is Allen Schreiber [sp.] I'm a fourth generation Nebraskan, a fourth generation Republican, former Army officer. I majored in geology at the University of Nebraska, I studied the Sand Hills - Ogallala Aquifer extensively from the people who literally wrote the textbooks about it. We've heard a lot of expert testimony here from oil industry shills saying it's all safe. We heard Ms. Tulquist's testimony about the Ogallala Aquifer and how there's limited risk, but no bona fides; she failed to mention the fact that she was also paid by TransCanada to come up with those results.    I have also coauthored an environmental impact statement for the proposed low level nuclear waste facility that was proposed up in Boyd County many years ago. I was part of an independent -- again, independent commission that authored that. We were not paid by anybody that had an interest in it. I am one of the few people probably outside the State Department and Entrix who have read the environmental impact statement from cover to cover. And my humble opinion is, "junk." It ignores many important topics that normally should be addressed in an environmental impact statement; it ignores the Environmental Protection Agency's own recommendations. It is a conflict of interest to use a contractor of the very oil company that wants to run the pipeline as your environmental impact statement.    It's clearly in somebody else's homework - - and in the academic world, that's called plagiarism. As far as national security goes, we keep hearing we need to wean ourselves from foreign oil. Last time I checked, Canada was a foreign country. A pipeline carrying known carcinogens that will leak into the Ogallala Aquifer water supply is an act of terrorism if it's known to do so, and they do it willingly. It is no different from flying airplanes into the Twin Towers to put a pipeline through our water supply and allow it to leak toxic chemicals.    As far as those toxic chemicals go, lacking in the environmental impact statement of the State Department is Material Safety Data Sheets. Thanks very much to You Tube and one very good person in the State of Michigan, I have seen a copy of Huskey Oils' Material Safety Data Sheet for the tar sand crude that's being cleaned up in Michigan currently. It is almost 50 percent solvents to make it thin enough to be pumped. It is composed mainly of benzene, toluene and xylene, all known carcinogens, all on the EPA's banned list.    As far as our national interests go, we keep hearing our president saying we need to increase our exports to other countries to get out accounting back on steep, we already have trouble, we know here in Nebraska, trying to get our beef exported to Japan and Korea because of one little bone chip. What's going to happen to our grain markets in Europe, our grain markets in Japan and Korea and our beef markets in Japan and Korea when there is a leak from the XL, and it gets into the water supply that waters our cattle and waters our crops? We will never export one single item out of this country or out of this state again.    As a lifelong Republican, I am proud to say that I was No. 147 to be arrested in front of the White House on September 3rd protesting the Keystone XL.    It is an act of insanity. And one of the things I learned early on in biology class is, organisms cannot live in their own waste products. My question to the State Department is, why would you want to okay something which is essentially -- pardon my French -- crapping in the pot that we eat out of?    Thank you.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaking No. 87.  
MS. SPEAKER: Thank you and welcome to our beautiful State. I've been asked by several mommies here and outside to speak for their babies and their unborn babies who cannot speak for themselves yet. I'm a native Lincolnite, I've lived here all my life. As a Health Care Provider of over 37 years, I know that healthy, safe water is what we need for our own health and well-being. I'm opposed to the TransCanada pipeline, period. My grandfather emigrated to Nebraska from Bohemia in the late 19th Century and homesteaded here, and we are now in our fifth generation in my family. The water needed for him to produce crops and to grow livestock and to maintain our health and our lives must be clean, safe and healthy. With the spill and leak incidents currently on record for TransCanada I am very, very concerned about future contamination of our water, our life blood. I have yet, before this meeting or during this meeting, to have anyone explain to me in a way that I can understand, or that most of us can understand, if this pipeline is built to cross our aquifer, and there's a leak or contamination, how will TransCanada clean our aquifer for us?    
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you.  
MR. HEATHERLY: Thank you. You're representatives of the State Department and President Obama. My name is Thomas Heatherly, I'm a student at the University of Nebraska, and I've also protested union-busting in Madison, Wisconsin and here in Nebraska, and I feel compelled to remind the crowd here that the union busting was paid for largely in part by Americans for Prosperity, and for the American Petroleum Institute.    And I have nothing but sympathy for the union workers, but I cannot condone jobs at any cost at all. And I strongly condemn TransCanada for using our economic woes as an excuse to frame this as a debate between jobs and the environmental extremists.    President Obama, this is an issue of Big Oil versus our immediate and future health. And thanks for the outpouring of objections from the citizens of Nebraska: We know that you know this. We also know that your reelection hinges on the energy of the people here and elsewhere in America that are the most vocal against this pipeline.    Stop this pipeline immediately so that we don't have to go to your doorstep and be arrested to get noticed. Stop this pipeline, or I feel that the true extremists will be in power in our government. Thank you.    
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker 89.  
MR. POLLACK: Thank you. I'm John Pollack, I'm from Omaha, I'm a meteorologist. I am here to oppose the pipeline and encourage you to do the same in part because of the climate impact. This is some of the most carbon-intensive oil that you can find anywhere on the planet, and it's going to be doing nothing but adding to the problems that we already have. FEMA has already run out of disaster money for the year, until Congress replenishes it. Most of that were climate disasters, and weather-related disasters that are being exacerbated by the extra carbon dioxide in the atmosphere. However, there's another aspect that I wanted to speak about, particularly concerning the Environmental Impact Statement and the erodability of the land. Somehow, despite supposedly a good amount of work going into this environmental impact statement, it completely missed the work of several climatologists right here at the University of Nebraska at Lincoln did, studying the Sand Hills. And what they concluded was that there was a 200-year drought between about the years 1000 and 1200 in a period sometimes called the medieval climate optimum. It was optimum in Europe, but in this part of the world it was a massive drought. And when that drought hit, those dunes moved. They were not stable, they lost their vegetation. In the lesser droughts, for example the 1930s, there were blowouts. But this was a multi- decade drought that desiccated the landscape. Now I think it's highly significant in that context that we're already having the most extraordinary drought in the history of the Southern Great Plains, right now as we speak; and that drought area threatens to move north. This is what the environmental impact statement says about putting vegetation down: Should long term precipitation patterns in the Sand Hills continue to change and vary, vegetation on the project would adapt similarly to vegetation in areas adjacent to the project. Well, the last time there was a major drought, the vegetation adjacent to the project adapted by drying up and blowing away and growing someplace else. If those sand dunes move, I don't know how long you think the pipeline will remain buried four feet. It's not going to be very long.    Furthermore, in the environmental impact statement it says Keystone is committed to post- construction monitoring and repair, and will monitor reclamation on the right-of-way for several years -- whatever 'several years' means. I think in a place with as much climate sensitivity as the Sand Hills, it should be permanent that you should not be digging in the first place under drought conditions.    But I saw nothing that said that you needed to wait for the drought to end, either there or further south where there is also erodable soil in Oklahoma and Texas. I thank you.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you.    
MS. HOBGOOD: Speaker No. 90.  
MS. JOHNSON: Hi. My name is Chelsea Johnson, and I'm a college student majoring in political science and economics at Nebraska Wesleyan University. I'm a born and raised Nebraskan and I'm opposed to this pipeline. I would first like to thank Heidi Tulquist, scientist for TransCanada, for explaining that an aquifer is not an underground lake, and that it is a complex system of porous soil and groundwater. I would like to tell the State Department that Nebraskans are very aware of the composition of the aquifer that nearly covers our state, and we are aware that this aquifer took tens of thousands of years to create, and we are aware that this is the lifeblood of our economy and our livelihood, and that this economy contributes to five percent of the United States of America's GDP.    TransCanada has absolutely no experience cleaning up an aquifer, and has no plan in place for how to do so. This is unacceptable, and the State Department's FEIS is unacceptable for not demanding there to be a plan. I have done a lot of research on how to clean aquifers, and what I found is that because the water completely infiltrates the soil, the land containing the contaminated aquifer has to be dug up and disposed of that way. The water contained in that soil was of course unfavorable. Considering a spill can go undetected for many days or weeks, allowing a plume to expand, I am wondering how much of our State TransCanada plans to dig up when there is a spill.    On a different note, I participated in the anti-pipeline rally this morning; and as we carried our inflatable pipe behind the pro-pipeline group, we were told to stay on our side; they don't want the pipe over there. Thank you, pipeline supporters, because this is exactly what we have been telling TransCanada. Regardless of past relations with Canada, there is absolutely nothing neighborly or friendly about coming down and threatening landowners and trying to shove this pipeline down our throats.    And for the State Department to approve this pipeline would be taking allegiance with a foreign corporation that absolutely does not have our national interests at heart; they have their bottom line at heart, and it would be turning their back, turning your back on your own citizens. I do not mean to discredit the validity of a need for jobs; that the jobs are needed is clear. However, it would be better to opt for other construction jobs that will actually increase our national security, because we wouldn't be dependent on foreign oil, period.    I acknowledge that we can't be off of oil right away; we will depend on it for some time. But why should we make ourselves more dependent?    There has been said the opposition to the pipeline comprises of crazy environmentalists. I can tell you from working on this issue for the past year, the opposition to this pipeline crosses all political parties and ideologies. People from all backgrounds, sensible Nebraskans are opposed to this pipeline. As a young adult, I know my generation wants change. I witnessed the entire student section at University of Nebraska-Lincoln boo TransCanada's ads at the football game. My generation is the future. Judging by the quality of the Final Environmental Impact Statement, I'm afraid that the democratic government I have been learning about since fourth grade has sold out to private corporations.    As a young adult whose heart is American and whose heart is Nebraskan, I am afraid a significant department of my government has turned its back on me, my generation, and my State.    
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker No. 91.  
MR. THOMPSON: My name is Randy Thompson, from Martell, Nebraska.    Having been a lifelong Nebraskan, since TransCanada has entered into the picture in the State of Nebraska, I have witnessed some very strange behavior from my fellow Nebraskans. It's not often that you see Nebraska people protesting.    Especially 50, 60, 70 and 80 year old ordinary citizens. That is not our M.O. here in Nebraska. You do not witness things like the boo-ing that went on in Memorial Stadium when the TransCanada ads came upon the big screen. That's not the way Nebraskans behave. So why are we behaving this way? Because we feel this is an extremely critical issue to our state, our citizens, our resources; and we feel that cards have been stacked against us.    Now maybe it's because our land, our heritage, our water and all the beauty of this State is more important to us than any amount of oil money you can give us.    Or maybe it's because we have seen no evidence that this project will be in our national interest.    How can you determine that oil passing through our country to some unknown destination is in our interest? It is not. And there is no guarantee that the United States will get any of this oil to be used domestically.    And just in closing, I would say this: We personally do not feel like putting our livelihoods, our resources, our drinking water at risk just for the benefit of Big Oil companies. Thank you.    
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. I understand that we have another one of your elected officials here, Norm Wallman. Can you come up, Senator Wallman?  
STATE SEN. WALLMAN: Thank you. Thank you, fellow Nebraskans, for showing up. I'm a lifelong Nebraskan farmer. Thank you for friends all. And I want to say I'm not an enemy of Canada. And also, it's our good neighbor, but TransCanada is a little bit different than a nation. So I heard a lot of good testimony here, and one of it was about disturbing the terrain. Just a couple inches of topsoil and you ruin that grass, and it's really hard to get started.    And so I have clay soils, I'm a farmer, lifelong farmer. you can put it through my place. I'm for moving the pipeline, I'm pro-pipeline. And so, I think this is a Nebraska problem, and we're trying to shove it to the federal level. Come on Nebraskans, let's solve it here.   
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker No. 92.  
MS. THOMPSON: My name is Lauren Thompson, and I'm a third generation Nebraskan. Today I will be reading a letter written by Erin Price, who couldn't be here today. He writes: Greetings, State Department members. My name is Erin Price and I have five generations of ranching and farming in Nebraska running through my blood. I am 27 years old and have multiple scars on my hands that mark the times I have shed blood and tears into the ranch that I love so dearly. It is located on the top of the thickest and cleanest part of the Ogallala Aquifer. I have managed this fragile ecosystem for nearly three decades and do not feel that the current environmental risk management is adequate to support Keystone XL development. Today I plan to expand from my ranching background and jump into larger political and security contacts I feel are being drastically ignored. I've spent a large part of my college and early professional career studying integrated food, water and energy policy. Sadly, one common theme is the short term political cycle which is undercutting our long term abilities to deal with complex and interconnected environmental and agricultural issues. We need to frame the issue here today in new long term natural resource planning contexts. Risking water quality, among other issues, for short term minimal energy returns is not working in the long term context. In the context of water abundance on my ranch, it's scary to look beyond the barbed wire and see what's going on globally with water issues related to climate change and variability. Water is a scarce and limited resource in many volatile parts of the world, like the Mideast, Sudan and Somalia, and the potential for conflict over raw resources could extend terrorism threats and worse. One of the United States' key and future strategic political interests will be the aquifer that we're all standing on here today. I know firsthand about all the inputs that go into ag production, and I promise you, it all goes back to water. Therefore we need to protect it from outside interests so we can maintain our own food and water security while engaging in the global community like we do today. We have plenty of renewable energy and other opportunities we can pursue on our own terms. We need to be start being visionary today with a new food, water, energy and security paradigm in our own federal government and state agencies. Business and politics as usual will not work. Today we risk leaving the next generation worse off for the first time in our nation's history. I firmly believe that the geopolitical security issues of food, water and energy that we face today will pose large uncertainties and risks for the operation of our economy and military, our superpower status, and global stability. This solution will demand new diplomacy and adaptive science and management to deal with the a varying climate, interconnected global economy, and diminishing resilience and ecosystems. Let's start this conversation today with the Keystone XL pipeline. Overall, I'm here today because I know my sixth generation would want me to be here. Future generations will require our nation and the skills in your department to reframe how we view national treasures like the Ogallala Aquifer instead as a strategic interest, and deal with climate change. I recommending rerouting around the Sand Hills and halting development until more of these issues can be resolved. Finally, I want to leave you with this parting thought: I hope you all get to see our State Capitol. We have a seed sower resting on top of the pillar and looking out west towards my ranching community and livelihood. In some symbolic way, I like to think that the seeds our sower is throwing are laws built on the beautiful foundation of democracy and freedom that we all enjoy and are fortunate to participate in here today. When the hammer falls and we all go home, pose this question to yourselves, Secretary Clinton and President Obama: What kind of seeds are we sowing for the future generations? State Department members, thank you for your time, energy, and service to our nation.    
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker No. 93.  
MS. SPEAKER: Good afternoon. I'm from Lincoln, Nebraska. My home county is Greeley, and it borders the Sand Hills. I'm very familiar with the Sand Hills, they're a beautiful part of our State. I want to talk a little bit about the rivers that we're crossing. We have a lot of rivers in Nebraska; the Niobrara, the Elkhorn, the Cedar River. And maybe you've never heard of Cedar River, but the Little Cedar River is a beautiful, narrow little river that starts up in Holt and Garfield Counties. It comes up from springs, probably the aquifer, whatever. It comes down through my home county, goes through Spalding, and there it supplies power. It's very narrow; you wouldn't believe it would do anything. Looks like an irrigation. The next river is the Blue River, the Platte River, and the Blue River which spreads all over here and there. I think our water supply involves all of these different rivers, which this is probably going to have some effect on. When I first started hearing different comments about the project, I wrote to Secretary Clinton. I did not receive an answer nor did I expect one, but I would like to read a little bit of what I wrote to her. Having written you in October, I am repeating concerns about the pipeline. Nebraska needs some help. We have excellent universities with much interest in research. Our teaching abilities and love of sports programs, all of this pales when it concerns our State's natural resources. I am sure most Nebraskans believe as I do that we do want to participate in solutions for the energy crisis. First and foremost, though, is the protection of some of the best farming country in the United States; our one-of-a-kind worldwide Sand Hills region, and last but perhaps not least, the Ogallala Aquifer. I and many others are only asking that we not let a foreign country dictate the route and let the present one be rerouted further east in our state to avoid at all costs permanent damage.    
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you.  
MS. SPEAKER: I have one more I'd like to read, if I can. I hope I haven't lost it. This is to our President Barack Obama: Knowing your very busy schedule, I will make this brief request. Please support those of us in Nebraska who love our productive state in refusing the Canadian XL pipeline's proposed route. A reroute to the eastern part of Nebraska would take care of our desire to help with the energy crisis. Money for land to those people in the further eastern location could give those people a boost. The present proposed route invades and threatens our prime farmland for corn, soybeans and other essential crops. I neither own nor do I farm any of this land. The old repetitive argument against use of Sand Hills pastureland and the aquifer area demanded by a foreign country still stands, and the XL bombarding commercials are an insult.    
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker 94.  
MR. ZINK: Good evening, thank you for coming to Nebraska and providing us this opportunity. My name is Larry Zink, I am 64 years old, I have lived in Nebraska most of my life; I was raised on a family farm and for the last 25 years, lived in the City of Lincoln. And in both those situations, I have become very familiar with the importance of groundwater to Nebraska, both in agriculture but also in our urban environments. I am here to speak and state the Keystone XL pipeline, as it's currently routed, is definitely not in the national interest, from my perspective.    I had a number of things that I wanted to share in remarks but quite truthfully, most of them have been said over and over again. So I think I want to share a few things perhaps that I have heard that might be worthy of noting. One, I don't oppose the pipeline per se, but its route through the Sand Hills in particular, and I think it should be rerouted. I have heard people talk about the importance of oil to our economic security, and I think probably most people here today would agree with that assessment, at least as we currently are structured. I've heard people talk about the importance of jobs to our economic security, and again I don't think that very many people would disagree with that. But I've also heard people talk about the importance of water supply and food supply; and I think in the long run I think most people would agree that those are perhaps even more important than oil.    As I listen to the people for the most part who have argued in support of the pipeline, the main argument I have heard over and over again is 'we need jobs, and we need quality jobs.' And I think most people would agree with that assessment. I think the people for the most part who have spoken today against the pipeline for the most part have spoken against its route and is wanting it to get out of the Sand Hills and the threat to the Ogallala Aquifer. From my perspective, there is no reason that these should be perceived as opposing points of view. There is an easy solution, for the most, from at least our national interest to solve that dilemma: Move the pipeline. Get it off the Ogallala Aquifer.    I would submit to the people who, the labor representatives who are here today that the fastest way to get these jobs is to join with us in an effort to move the pipeline to a safer route.    That will provide the jobs that will satisfy safety of our water system and it will improve our national interest and our national economic security. I invite Secretary Clinton, President Obama, members of the labor unions and the conservationists and Nebraskans to work together to find a better route for this pipeline. Thank you very much.    
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. After we hear from the 95th speaker, I'd like us to take just a five minute break for our official reporter. Thank you.  
MR. WENTZ: Thank you for coming to hear us speak. I am Troy Wentz. When the colonists in the New World were abused by Great Britain, they came together to stop the abuse, and American Founders wrote these words: Powers of the earth, the laws of nature, and nature's God. I am here because my conscious does not want to see more land, water and Americans abused by TransCanada. When they built their first pipeline, they took land from people who did not want a tar oil river flowing through their property, and our government let them. And TransCanada assumed they could abuse Americans again with the XL pipeline. But history has shown many times from the New World colonists to endangered species and abuse of governments this year, when people or the earth are abused, they will come. Nebraskans rose to oppose Governor Heineman. Americans and people abroad have risen to oppose Obama, and after resting, Americans began to rim the White House, there arose an earthquake and Hurricane Irene. Maybe a warning sign to D.C. For when Mother Earth is abused, she's left with no choice but to strike back. As for the people who said the XL pipeline will help meet American's energy needs, I believe they are lying. I believe Canadians and Americans will be abused to meet China's needs. For if the pipeline goes to the Gulf, China owns the Panama Canal, and the Chinese government and corporations who have abused their people and who abuse the earth don't care if they burn dirty tar oil. And as for the oil spills from TransCanada's first pipeline, the toxic oil should be put on Michelle Obama's garden so Obama can see the land and plants suffer and be reminded of BP. If the pipeline is never built, then only one toxic tar oil river will risk poisoning the rivers and land of Nebraska, not two. With 2012, now Obama and Congress are talking about creating jobs. One reason Nebraska's unemployment is so low is because land and water have provided food and jobs for generations.    If the pipeline is denied, it will never destroy or contaminate the land and water that helps to feed the union workers and their families who want the temporary pipeline jobs. If the pipeline is denied, it will never poison the land and water that helps to feed our world. Maybe some day the Canadian politicians who sold their souls and allowed the tar sands oil production to begin will see how destructive it has become. See how it is poisoning the land, water and people of Canada, and they will shut it down. This I don't know. But I do know TransCanada's abuses are bringing people together who care, intelligent people to oppose Mr. Obama and stop the abuse. We the people have come and I believe Nature's God is watching. I also know if the president says yes, build the pipeline, it will show the world as for the oil corporations and the destruction of the earth, there's no difference between Barack Obama and George W. Bush.    
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Again, if we can break for five minutes. We will resume at 6:20 with Speaker No. 96.   
MS. HOBGOOD: If we can resume the public meeting with Speaker No. 96. Speaker No. 96.  Speaker No. 97?  
MS. CHRISTENSEN: My name is Ann Christensen. This morning I drove five hours from Iowa City to be here. I appreciate the welcome of the friendly Nebraskans; they haven't arrested me yet, as I was in Washington a few weeks ago, when I was at the tar sands protest.    Much of what I wanted to say has already been said more ably, so I'll try to keep this short. I do want to say that I'm a very strong union supporter. I know that our economy is stronger when our unions are stronger -- and I hope to see that happen. I want to take umbrage with the gentleman who said this is a Nebraska problem. This is not a Nebraska problem, it's a world problem.    The respected British newspaper, The Guardian has named the tar sands pipeline "one of the ten worst environmental projects in the world today." I've traveled around the world; I've been on every continent including Antarctica, and in my 75 years I've seen a lot of degradation of our environment. This is now. It's not for our grandchildren. My grandchildren will not be able to drink oil; I don't think yours will -- but the time is now, it's our generation that's going to be suffering before the younger ones. James Hansen, NASA's preeminent scientist, part of this administration, has said that if the pipeline goes through, it's all over for the environment. I hope that President Obama will live up to his campaign promises. I'm a strong reporter of him, but I must say I've been disappointed later. He can come back, he'll have my vote, but I hope that he denies the pipeline. Thank you.    
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker No. 98. If Speaker No. 98 is not present, I understand Brent Smoyer, with the Lancaster County Board of Commissioners is here. Can you come up and speak?  
COMMISSIONER SMOYER: My name is Brent Smoyer, for the record. I am a Lancaster County Commissioner here in Lincoln, Nebraska, representing Lincoln and Northeast Lancaster County, including Waverly and Davey. I'm going to keep my remarks pithy and quick as possible, as I see there is a considerable number of people here to testify. To keep it short and sweet, this pipeline needs to be built. As a County Commissioner here in Lancaster, I have to admit I'm a little jealous of the counties that this pipeline will be running through because of the tax revenue it will bring in; not just for the counties, for the cities, communities and for the State. I am also exceptionally in favor of the job creation that will occur from this pipeline; not just from Central Nebraska where it will be located, but coming from Omaha, coming from Lincoln. These opportunities to get our economy going and rolling in Nebraska. We do have a little over 4 percent unemployment rate, but I would love nothing more than to see that unemployment rate drop, and this pipeline is a key to seeing that happen for communities across the State. So I would just voice my support for this pipeline, for this project and encourage you kind folks at the State Department to let this project roll and bring in the economic development we need here in Nebraska. Thank you.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you.   
MS. HOBGOOD: Speaker No. 99.  
DR. PURDON: My name is Dr. Liam Purdon. I'm a concerned citizen. Even during the current manufactured recession, TransCanada's proposed Keystone XL pipeline, a line to be laid diagonally across Nebraska from Valentine to Fairbury, it's truly a very bad idea. Not because the pipeline's technology, like the 40-year old technology of the current Keystone line that has ruptured 12 times in its first year of operation, will not be of a quality to handle the new highly acidic, corrosive, diluted bitumen or 'dilbit crude' that will flow through it from Canada to Texas at the rate of 900,000 barrels per day. Nor is it a bad idea, because the U.S. Department of Transportation Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration or PHMSA has failed to acknowledge the obvious difference between conventional crude and dilbit crude, a difference consisting of the fact that the former is an oil that flows in pipelines at ambient temperatures under pressures of only 600 psi, while the latter is an oil that must flow in pipelines at the high temperature of 160 degrees Fahrenheit under high pressures of 1,440 psi or more. Nor is Keystone XL a bad idea because PHMSA has failed to do its due diligence by not identifying the significant difference in chemical composition between these two types of crude; a difference including dilbit's 15 to 20 times higher acid concentrations such as chloride salts that can lead to chloride stress corrosion, especially under high temperatures. Dilbit's five to ten times greater sulfur content which, upon pipeline rupture and explosion can result in the result in the release of hydrogen sulfide, a gas causing suffocation in concentrations over 100 part per million. Dilbit's significantly larger quantities of non-biodegradable heavy metals such as vanadium, nickel, and arsenic, and significantly larger quantities of abrasive quartz sand particles. And Dilbit's 70 times greater viscosity that requires dilution by toxic carcinogenic hydrocarbons; natural gas liquid condensates such as naphtha or benzene to make it soluble. No, TransCanada's proposed Keystone XL pipeline is a bad idea for one simple reason, a truly frightening fact about the physics of the unique chemical composition of the dilbit crude that will pass through it, a fact that has deliberately been downplayed in the current debate: At high temperatures and under high pressures, the mixture of light gases hydrocarbon condensate and thick, heavy bitumen can easily become unstable, confronting Nebraskans and other Americans living along or near the route with a ticking time bomb whose dirty contents, when released, are guaranteed to contaminate water, land and food for decades if not generations to come.    
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. We also have a school board candidate, Jane Kleib, who wishes to speak. Can you come to the microphone?  
MS. KLIEB: Good evening. I'm actually a proud School Board member. I did get elected on a platform of healthy lunches; proud to say that platform was succeeded within six months. But I'm not here to talk about school lunches; today I'm here to talk about the pipeline. And today I am proud to stand with my Fellow Nebraskans to say I am a pipeline fighter.    And I am very proud to say that I am an Ogallala Aquifer and Sand Hills lover.    But probably what I am most proud of is every single Nebraskan who spoke from their heart and spoke with facts today, and came here on their own free will to make sure that you knew that Nebraskans are not only opposed to this pipeline, but if we can't completely stop it, we are literally begging you to change the route. Because our state elected officials are not taking the authority that they have to change the route and put the proper state-based regulations in place.    And so I am here to deliver half of the petitions we've collected; this over 2,500 Nebraskans that have all written to you, and I will just close with, we get lots of letters from lots of Nebraskans, and this one was from a group of nuns. And I will just read the quote at the bottom of their paper, because they said: Preach the truth as if you had a million voices. It is silence that kills the world. And I will tell you, when we started this, we didn't think we had a prayer to go up against Big Oil. But as you will see today, we not only have a prayer but we have Nebraskans on our side to stop this pipeline. Thank you.    
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker No. 100.  
MR. CHRISTENSEN: Well, I'm speaker No. 100, and I didn't think this moment would arise.  My name is John Christensen. I came with the previous speaker, Ann Christensen, from Iowa City, Iowa, and I also participated in the demonstration at the White House, and was arrested with her.    As we got out of jail, there was this earthquake that someone mentioned, at the same moment. But nothing changed; I don't know why. I first heard about the tar sands, the present that we're getting of Canadian oil from radio and television ads last spring. And there were people sitting around just talking to each other, and finally one of them was saying, "Did you know that Canada has all this oil, and if we would use it, it would solve all of our problems?" And I heard that several times on the radio, and I couldn't figure out where it was coming from, and then I saw it on television and I saw that the American Petroleum Institute was paying for the ads. Then later on, after we returned from Washington, D.C., there was a big ad on our local paper, and it was a full color ad, full color, half sheet, and it was called "The promise of Canadian oil sands." And it was talking about the Canadian oil as kind of like a savior for our oil problem. And then the ad appeared again the next week, but it was exactly the same except the caption says, "Who are the Americans who will benefit from Canadian oil sands?" The first one had, Brenda M., Operating Engineer. The next time it appeared, it was Tim G., pipefitter, but it was the exact same ad. Then the next week it appeared again, but Tim was still on, the person receiving all the benefits from the Canadian oil sands. In extremely small type on the lower right hand that I could barely read with my bifocals, it said that it was copyrighted by the American Petroleum Institute. But on the left side, in a big block -- not that big, about like this -- it said that "Developing Canadian oil sands could support 600,000 American jobs." That's a lot of jobs. I thought maybe it was a typo, but each one of the three ads said the same thing. And then I saw, in a letter to the editor of the New York Times on August 29th that the Canadian ambassador to the United States, Gary Doer, wrote that, and he was supporting the pipeline. He said, "Construction of Keystone XL will create 20,000 direct and 118,000 indirect jobs." I thought, that's a big difference. And then when we came in this morning, I saw a sign that said "800,000 jobs will be created." So I was just wondering what was going on here. A lot of those jobs will be temporary construction jobs. If all the money that went into all of these ads -- and I know these ads are in newspapers all over the Midwest, then the television and radio ads are, too; along with the money being used to do this line, if it were used for investment in a clean energy economy, it would lead to more jobs and permanent, higher-paying jobs --    -- than further investment in fossil fuel. And I have just one other thing I was going to say; there has been a suggestion by quite a few people, maybe half the people, that they should move that pipeline east. And I live in Iowa, and I don't want it moved east --  I say stop it. Stop the pipeline.    
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker No. 101.  
MS. SMITH: Thank you for being here today. My name is Carol Smith. I was born in Lincoln, Nebraska and I've lived my entire life here. And I'm hoping that the permit for the Keystone XL pipeline will be denied.    It is going to destroy valuable natural resources here in Nebraska, but the tar sands mining operation will continue to destroy the boreal forest of the First Nations land in Alberta equal to the size of Florida. Most important to me, however, is that this dirty oil -- if this dirty oil is burned, it will disrupt the complex system of interdependence that sustains life on our planet by increasing greenhouse gases far beyond what has existed for the last 5,000 years.    Those facts are from James Hansen, NASA scientist, climatologist, and I was arrested in Washington, D.C. the same day he was.    In 2007, President Bush signed into law Section 526 of the Energy Independence and National Security Act. It prohibits the U.S. Government, which is the largest single fuel purchaser in the United States, from using taxpayer dollars to purchase fuels that have a higher carbon footprint than conventional oil. If our government can't legally purchase this oil, why should we be forced to use it?    And I just want to add that I stand with Randy Thompson of Nebraska --    -- I stand with the First Nations of Canada who are losing their lands to tar sands mining.    I stand with the Appalachian people who are losing their land to mountain top removal.    Our nation is filled with smart people that can solve our energy crisis without resorting to tar sand oil. The First Nations people of Canada are keeping this dirty oil from getting out of Canada to the West, and we need to stand with them to keep it from getting to the Gulf of Mexico. It must stay in the ground.    
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker 102.  
MR. HARVEY: Good evening. My name is Kevin Harvey. I'm the webmaster for the Progressive Green Party. Politics aside, I am from Western Nebraska. My father owned a cattle ranch. We weren't technically in the Sand Hills, but you could see them from our back door. When the Frenchman river, which abutted the north end of our property, dried up we had no longer a way to irrigate our crops, nor our cattle. That feed lot -- perhaps you've heard of The Chisolm Trail. That feed lot was the last stop on The Chisolm Trail; it was 60 miles south of Ogallala. More importantly I want to welcome all the people that came, even in your orange shirts, because that's what Nebraskans do. Welcome. Welcome to Lincoln.    Any Nebraskan will do that to you; they'll wave at you. One finger, two fingers as they are driving down the road. But if you come to harm us, not so much. We're not going to welcome you. Back to my father. He was a cattle rancher, he was a farmer, he was a landowner. Those are three things you've heard a lot of. But the most important thing is what they were, and the people that came here to speak, the ranchers and farmers and cattle ranchers, they were stewards of the land.    TransCanada is a steward of the bottom line. Our source of water dried up, so we were forced to sell our cattle ranch. My father, after leaving the ranching and cattle business, went into irrigation. He spent the next 35 to 40 years selling irrigation equipment; center pivots, all over the world. First all over Nebraska then all over the United States, and then he went international. He spent a year and a half in Saudia Arabia. He had a quota with Lockwood to sell 500 center pivot irrigation pivots to the Saudis. He had audiences with King Fahd and King Faisal and Prince Abdulla. He sold 650 center pivot irrigations in 18 months. He only had to sell 500 in two years, but he sold 650 pivots at $50,000 a pop to the Saudis. And if the Saudis think oil is big business, why do you think they're buying up all those irrigation equipment?    They recognize the value of the water. That's why I oppose the Keystone pipeline.    
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you.  
MS. GOULD: Thank you for the opportunity to speak. My name is Donna Gould, and I live here in Lincoln, Nebraska. I took the afternoon off work as a technology manager to come here, because this issue is so important to me. I grew up on a cow-calf operation here in Nebraska, and I understand the importance of water for drinking and sustaining life, water from the Ogallala Aquifer. I urge the State Department to deny this permit. First of all, I have serious concerns about the process used to acquire the land for the pipeline and the treatment of the landowners by TransCanada, a foreign company threatening Americans for their land. Second, the risk of putting the pipeline over or near the Ogallala Aquifer is too great. I have no doubt that my friends in Orange will build the best, most advanced pipeline possible. However, as someone who works in technology, I know that even things that are over-engineered can and do break. When this pipeline breaks, it has the potential to turn one of Nebraska's greatest assets into a huge liability, poisoning the environment and endangering our water. We've heard the experts here today say that there is minimal risk, but not no risk. We've heard that a series of events would have to happen for there to be serious risks to the environment. But we've seen that happen, for example, in Fukushima, Japan where the nuclear plant could have sustained an earthquake, or a tsunami, or a power outage; but not the perfect storm of all three at the same time. We've heard that oil has limited mobility; but what about the other chemicals like benzene and xylene that are somewhat soluble with water, and toxic at tiny fractions of their solubility level? I'm a supporter of labor, and it isn't often that I find myself on the opposite side of an issue with them. But the risk of this pipeline is too great. I urge the State Department to deny this permit. Thank you.    
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker 106.  
MR. ATTORNEY: Well, you've had quite an introduction to Nebraska, haven't you? I think perhaps you've sort of gotten the impression that, you know, we're kind of -- you know, we were a rural state, we have some farming and some ranching, and it's been such a serious session so far, I thought maybe we needed a little humor. So I was going to tell you my three-legged chicken joke. But I realized that if I told that joke that's so long and involved that I'd use up all my time from the joke and I couldn't tell you anything else. So let me just tell you a little bit about why I'm here. I have a bachelor's degree in history from the University of Nebraska. I have a law degree from the University of Nebraska College of Law. I practiced law here in Lincoln for about 25 years. I was trained by the U.S. Army as a transportation corps officer, first in all modes of transportation; rail, truck, water, pipeline, air. I became very curious about this whole project that was going on, this pipeline, and I've done some investigation. I'm not a member of some group that wants to have us quit burning coal or quit importing oil, but I am a third generation Nebraskan and I'm concerned about our State, and I'm concerned about what's going to happen if this pipeline comes. I discovered some very interesting things; number one, one of the premises that the people is using, they're saying "Well, you know, all these counties that this pipeline is going through -- all these counties are going to get all this wonderful tax money." And I remembered reading that there was another pipeline company that came through Nebraska, Rocky Mountain-something, and they had in fact protested the taxation that had occurred, and now there are 16 counties in Nebraska that are going to have to cough up thousands of dollars in refunds because of the evaluation problem. We're at your mercy, all of us. Everyone here in this room, we're at your mercy. We screwed up. We, according to the Nebraska Public Service Commission, have not a single statute regulating a pipeline that carries crude oil through the State of Nebraska. There is no legislation. We Biff'd it. We Bop'd it. There's a call for a special session. I hope every state senator that hears about this will join in the call for the special session.    But if that doesn't happen, you are our last hope. The message that you give to Hillary and President Obama will determine what will happen here in Nebraska. The pipeline is the wrong idea for transporting that oil.    It's the wrong idea, routed in the wrong place; and boy, I'll tell you, I've got a solution for all these people in orange and lime. That oil company executive that's attending here today, why don't you pledge that you're going to hire all of these people so that you have a pick up truck with a couple of them about every five miles along the course of the pipeline so that you can get a good response time when things screw up as they're going to screw up?     
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker No. 107.  
MR. MOORE: My name is Ken Moore, I'm the Regional Minister in the Christian church Disciples of Christ in Nebraska, and I'm speaking on behalf of Interfaith Ministries and Nebraska Interfaith Power & Light. Interfaith Power & Light is a nationwide movement that was founded over a decade ago to mobilize a religious response to the moral challenge of climate change and global warming. There are chapters in 38 states and over 14,000 congregations represented; and I'm privileged to serve as the Board President of Nebraska Interfaith Power & Light. IPL strongly opposes the construction of the Keystone XL pipeline on moral grounds. Proponents are quick with assurances about reliability, but TransCanada's Keystone I, as we've heard many times, has had 12 leaks in the first year, including this spring's 500 barrel gusher in North Dakota, which forced the Obama Administration to shut it down. Imagine if this happened in the Ogallala Aquifer, which provides 30 percent of America's drinking water and irrigates the nation's Midwest and Southern farms. The proposed pipeline would run directly over the aquifer, and according to our governor, our farmers count on 92,685 irrigation wells to provide water for more than 8.5 million acres of crops and pastures. The Sand Hills of Nebraska is an ecological treasure. Before coming to Nebraska, I had never heard of the Sand Hills. I came here from Montana, but after tubing on the Loup River and canoeing the Calamus River and exploring its hills and valleys, I can understand why this unique region has been designated an eco-region by the Worldwide Fund for Nature.    According to their assessment, as much as 85 percent of the Sand Hills eco region is intact natural habitat, the highest level in the Great Plains. It is an area rich with streams and ponds that feed into the Ogallala Aquifer. It is not an appropriate place to put an oil pipeline.    In addition to the risk to our water supply and food production, tar sands oil emits 82 percent more carbon pollution than conventional oil, according to the EPA. Leading scientists registering opposition to the project have stated that the exploitation of tar sands in addition to conventional fossil fuels will leave our children and grandchildren a climate system with consequences that are out of their control. As a person of faith, I oppose the Keystone XL pipeline because of the threat that it poses to the Sand Hills and the Ogallala Aquifer, and because I believe that it is in the national interest for President Obama to leave the nation in an urgent response to the climate crisis, through implementation of better fuel efficiency standards for cars and trucks that are claimed safeguards, EV cars and so on. Thank you for the opportunity to share with you.    
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker No. 108.  
MR. BERNT: My name is Robert Bernt, I'm from Wheeler County, Nebraska, and the pipeline runs directly four miles to the west of me. I live downriver on the Cedar River, and it's going to cross under the Cedar approximately those four miles. I'm here on behalf of my great grandad, my grandad and my dad who settled the Sand Hills, who fought with their lives to protect those Sand Hills and the Ogallala Aquifer under them.    There's been a lot of subjects talked about here today. I'd like to shed some light on some that have not been talked about. In 1974 there was an earthquake that stretched along the proposed pipeline from Stewart, Nebraska south to Bartlett. And just as soon as last year, there were two earthquakes, one southwest of Stuart again, registering 4.2 on the Richter scale, and one at Greeley, Nebraska, which registered 3.2. Now this fault line would run directly underneath that pipeline at several points, from my understanding. Now this is a grave concern to me after what has happened in Japan, whether this could be sufficient to withstand that kind of a shock. That's one proposal I want to suggest hasn't been brought up. The other one is the recreational benefits. My son runs an outfitting thing on the Cedar River, along with two others. In a short ten mile stretch of that river, of just that river where this line's going to cross, they generated $150,000 in tanking and canoeing. And according to the Governor's Agritourism Council, each dollar generated locally returns five. That's $750,000 that we're jeopardizing at that point. And I wish not to do that. If you would go on to the Nebraska UNL groundwater water research, they have test wells in the State of Nebraska, all over, giving us the water depth. And you'll see that west of Bartlett, Nebraska where this line is proposed, the water table has actually increased, at record height. So that water is definitely higher than it has been according to their records, concern. The water also, in the Ogallala -- my family's been there, like I said, since it was Kincaid Act. In 1952 there was some deep well explorations done in that area. And the water moved at such a rapid rate that the gentleman that was drilling the well could not remove his drilling rig. So the water does move. Now everybody here today that I've heard has been concerned about this: It's driven everybody here, it's forcing the job issue; you know, you believe in this and I'm sorry if your jobs are affected, whatever. But I'll guarantee the people from Nebraska believe in this, too, and they believe in the inscription on the back that says "In God we trust." Thank you.    
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker No. 109.  
MR. DUCKERSON: Thank you. My name is Roddy Duckerson. I am the Conference Minister of the Nebraska Conference, United Church of Christ, and along with my colleague Ken Moore who spoke a moment ago, we together run a camping operation in Burwell, Nebraska. In the midst of that wild part of anybody, young people come to experience a bit of peace, a bit of rural, a bit of wild, a bit of rivers that don't run dry because they come out of the aquifer. Like others, I'm deeply concerned about this pipeline and about where it is going. But I also believe that there are deeper concerns. Like others, I am part of not just Nebraska but I am part of the United States and of the world. And I know that the concerns about this oil are extraordinary. My colleague, Jim Antoll, the Conference Minister in Massachusetts says, "The temptation to approve the Keystone pipeline is great. Vast amounts of oil can be extracted. But if they are mined and processed, those tar sands will become the second largest carbon bomb to be released into the atmosphere behind only the oil fields of Saudia Arabia." And quoting as others have, NASA Climatologist James Hansen, Jim says to us that he has explained in a paper issued this summer that "If we tap them, the emissions would mean it is essentially 'game over' for the climate." As a person of faith, that is a bridge too far. I hope you will oppose this pipeline.    
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker 110.  
MR. ANDERSON: Good afternoon. My name is Jim Anderson. There are many reasons to oppose the development of the Keystone XL people. Here are just a few. Mining tar sands is a very expensive and a very ecologically-destructive process. We must remember that Canadian forests have to be cut down and the land strip-mined in order to obtain oil from these tar sands. This process creates many toxic by-products, which further pollute the groundwater and the land around it. Plus extracting and processing tar sands oil will contribute much more to greenhouse gas emissions than conventionally-produced oil, thus warming up our planet even more, causing much more extreme weather patterns to occur. We've also have got to remember that large amounts of water will be needed to extract and eventually transport this oil; roughly five gallons of water will be needed to produce just one gallon of tar sands oil, which makes it a very inefficient way to produce energy.    We've also got to remember that in Nebraska this pipeline would cross many rivers and streams, including the Niobrara, the Platte, the Loup, Big Blue Rivers. It would cross over the Ogallala Aquifer, where in many cases the groundwater and surface waters are very nearby each other. This pipeline would cross through the Sand Hills with its porous sandy soils. How Canada TransCanada guarantee that major leaks will not occur when it has already experienced 12, 14, 30 leaks already in the past year on its much smaller Keystone pipeline. The proposed Keystone XL pipeline will be 36 inches, high pressure crude oil pipeline. Such pipelines have heightened risk of oil spills due to the corrosive nature of tar sands oil. Once an oil leak is noticed, in reality it would be very difficult and expensive to clean up, especially major leaks. You've all already heard about the Ogallala Aquifer, how it's the largest underground source of fresh water. We depend on it for clean drinking water and for many agricultural needs. Placing a high pressure pipeline above the aquifer makes no sense. Accidents will happen. Are we really prepared to deal with the many negative consequences that will result? Wouldn't it be much wiser instead to focus our efforts on developing cleaner and safer, renewable sources of energy?    Why not focus on developing much more fuel efficient vehicles, developing vehicles which will not need or depend on petroleum as a fuel source?  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you.    
MR. ANDERSON: Thank you.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Speaker No. 111.  
MS. PACKARD: I'm Nancy Packard from Lincoln, Nebraska. Can I be heard? -- A small joke -- I've heard other people say "I don't object to the pipeline." Well, I don't object to the pipeline, either, but I strongly object to what it's going to carry through it.  I dutifully studied as much as I could of the environmental impact statement, and at nearly the very end, it compares the tar sands oil with other oils; there are about four or five of them, and one from Mexico, one from Venezuela, and it talks about the differences in the strata they're located in, let's say, and their chemical composition. Anyway, I was trying to study and figure out the differences between them, and they're fairly minuscule. And I came to realize it was such a pointless exercise to be dealing with such negativity. It made me confirm, in my view, that climate change is real and that we've got to not be putting this sort of thing into the world.    So I know that you want some facts, and so I went to the State Department's website to see what they had to say about climate change, and prominent on the front is about a three paragraph little essay talking about climate change. I'm going to read a little bit of it: The United States is taking a leading role in addressing climate change by advancing an ever-expanding suite of measures. Goes on to tell about that. And then it says: All countries that contribute to atmospheric emissions must undertake measurable, reportable and verifiable mitigation actions in order to cut greenhouse gas emissions. The world community must work collaboratively to slow, stop, and reverse greenhouse gas emissions in a way that promotes sustainable economic growth, increases energy security and helps nations deliver greater prosperity for their people. A couple of facts that I have gleaned. One is, the average temperature of our earth has been 57 degrees for most of human history. We're headed towards 61 degrees and more. That sounds like such a teeny little elevation; and yet if we would go to, do our research on the Internet, we'll see that that little bit of temperature elevation is melting glaciers and it is causing other catastrophic events. The burning of coal and oil has produced about three-quarters of the increase in carbon dioxide over the past 20 years. I think it's a very Dickensian phrase to call this oil and the coal we're dealing with 'crude.' This is the crudest form of energy, and I think the name is apt.    So, please don't clap; I want my time. I went on a hunt to see who believes in climate change and who doesn't, because I know there are very loud people with a consistent and narrow message, a repetitive message saying there's no climate change. Well, this is what I learned. I found that since 2001, national science academies from Germany, Brazil, Russia, South Africa, Great Britain, United States, Sweden, Italy, Ireland, France, Australia, India, Japan, China and Mexico acknowledge global warming. That was since 2001. I learned that no scientific body of national or international standing has maintained a dissenting opinion. A few are noncommittal, and the noncommittal status comes because you can't actually conduct an experiment on the earth. You can't have two earths; this earth, which you subject to increased carbon dioxide and this one which you don't and then say "Yup, that was the bad thing. We shouldn't have done it." We're living the experiment.  
MS. HOBGOOD: If you can wrap up your comments.  
MS. PACKARD: Oh, yes. Okay. I learned that 90 to 97 percent of active scientists think man-made global warming is occurring. Is the Keystone XL pipeline in our national interest? Yes, it is if we want little short term jobs and if we want people mopping and scrubbing up the Ogallala Aquifer, and if we want to deal with hurricanes and we want to deal with floods, yes it's in our interest, if we want those kind of jobs. But if we're going to do what America can do, if we are going to be Thomas Edisons and create ways for energy, if we want to build a citizenry these pipefitters -- if we're going to put them to work on solar panels, let's get busy. Let's turn down the XL pipeline. If you believe that the United States of Americans can still in the best ways.    
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker No. 112.  
MS. TEETE: Good evening. Thank you for coming to Nebraska. And thank you for allowing citizens like me to speak. My name is Lisa Teete , I am not a radical activist, I am a lifelong Nebraska resident; wife and mother of two children. From my understanding, humans lived without oil for centuries, and I think we need to start weaning ourselves off of it.    Like all humans, I drink water, and I'm opposed to this pipeline. My father, Leon Siederlan, could not make it here today; he has been keeping tabs on all the lies that TransCanada has been spreading across our State with the money that they're also spreading across our State. He drinks water, too, and he is opposed to this pipeline. Please listen to the water and soil experts who haven't been paid by TransCanada.    Next, take a look at the polluted waters across our nation. How much would we have paid, given hindsight, to prevent these spills? You have the opportunity now to prevent a catastrophe. To raise the issue of national security, aren't we all safer if our clean water is protected and kept clean? Think terrorism, bombs, earthquakes. The first Keystone pipeline sprung a geyser in North Dakota on May 7th of this year, my sister's birthday. It leaked 21,000 gallons due to a failed pipe fitting. How would a 21,000 gallon geyser of tar sands crude affect the Ogallala Aquifer? This pipeline will be buried four feet into porous soils; the water table mere feet below that, and in constant fluctuation. What happens when, not if it leaks? If the pipeline is approved, I'm asking to please move it away from the aquifer. Thank you.    
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Before I call on the next speaker, we're at Speaker No. 113, and over 200 speakers have signed in. So I just ask you to try and be as succinct as you can. And of course you can turn in your written comments. A lot of you have been reading your comments and not speaking extemporaneously, and I want to assure you that if you can shorten your comments, anything that you have written down will be made a matter of record. Speaker No. 113.  
MR. SWIFT: Hi, my name is Greg Swift. I grew up in Omaha, went to college here in Lincoln, and then got a Ph.D. in physics at the University of California at Berkeley. I recently retired from Los Alamos National Laboratory, where I worked on basic energy research for 31 years. I urge the Obama Administration to block the construction of this pipeline because the evidence convinces me that long term climate change caused by burning too much coal, oil and natural gas is a huge threat to American stability. The climate change part of the State Department's environmental analysis compared the tar sands with other crude oil. I think the whole premise of that analysis is wrong-headed. The sensible analysis would be the comparison between burning up the tar sands versus leaving it in the ground and developing alternative energy instead.    Getting serious now about building a new alternative energy infrastructure in this country would create jobs and give us better energy security, and give us a decent climate in the future. Look, neither TransCanada Corporation at one end of this pipeline nor Valero and the other refineries at the other end have any concern about the climate unless the government forces such concern on me through regulations. What do I mean about concern the climate? Those companies have no concern whether our grandchildren have to grow cotton in Nebraska because it's too hot to grow corn or soybeans. But the Obama Administration should care about disruption like that. You should use whatever regulatory power is available to you now to slow climate change. Stopping this pipeline would be one good step. Thank you.    
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker No. 115.  
MR. SPEAKER: I didn't think I'd ever make it this far. Been here a long time. Welcome, thanks for being here and listening to our rants and raves. Anyway, number one I'm against the burning of oil as fuel. We need to get away from that as soon as we possibly can. And I know there's things that we can't deal with right now because of politics, but as far as the pipeline goes, if there's a chance in a million that that thing leaks into our water, it's too big of a risk to take.    The thing has been mentioned once before today, and that is an alternative route for the pipeline. I already feel like it's pretty much a done deal as far as the pipeline was going to be put in. I just hope we can influence its route. Why can't it be run next to the Keystone, which they already have? They already have roads, rights-of-way, pumping stations, et cetera. To me, that's a no-brainer. Run the two side by side.    No need to do any more environmental studies; all that stuff has been done, they already have a pipeline there. That's all I have to say. Thank you.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you.    
MS. HOBGOOD: Speaker No. 117.  
MS. CLARK: Thank you for the opportunity to speak today. My name is Shelly Clark, I live in Omaha, but I grew up and spent most of my life in Western Nebraska. I speak in opposition to the XL pipeline. I'm affiliated with no one other than myself. I am not a scientist, I am not a lobbyist, I am not a paid union member bused in here. I am not an elected official or a paid geologist; and thank God, I am not an employee of TransCanada.    I have been here all day because I am a Nebraskan, a mother, a grandmother, a former teacher, union member, and now a small business owner -- yes, a business owner that provides Nebraska jobs. And I care about our land and water, simple as that. I am the great grandchild of homesteaders, a fifth generation Nebraskan, and I feel that their spirit is here with me today to help me voice my opposition to this pipeline. I believe it's greed and greed only that is behind the insistence of TransCanada to put the pipeline through this fragile ecosystem.    I am not a radical, I am the granddaughter and daughter of the stewards of this land here in Nebraska, who instilled in me a respect for this land that sustains me. I'm also here today to represent a voice that has no ability to speak here, or anywhere else; and that is for the American Burying Beetle. This small creature, but very important insect to our ecosystem -- some might say they are the original great recyclers. This pipeline will disturb their habitat. Nebraska is one of the few last stands for this insect. Nebraska has one of the last remnants of a healthy population of the American Burying Beetle. So today, in part, I am lending my voice for this small insect. Finally, I commend our Nebraska state senators who spoke here today, Senator Haar and others. This morning I read in the Omaha World Herald that 32 of our state legislators still can't decide -- I think that was the quote, still can't decide about a special session. Come on, what more information do they need? Shame on those senators.    Fellow Nebraskans, if you are against this pipeline, please when you leave this session today, as soon as you can, please call and write your state senator, and please try to get them to give us a special session. Thank you for your time, for coming here to Nebraska. I appreciate it. Thank you.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you.    
MS. HOBGOOD: Speaker No. 119. I think 119 is coming.  
MS. REED: My name is Dorie Reed, and I'm a clinical psychologist here in Lincoln. But I was born and raised in rural Nebraska. Anyone in rural Nebraska understands the importance of the land and water resources to our economy. The crops and the livestock raised in this State for a large part feed this nation and the world.    When you sit down to dinner, the food on that table was supplied by, in large part by this State. Not food on our plates; we eat what we raise here. But the food on your plate.    I once saw a New York's idea of the map of the United States. The Eastern third of the U.S. was marked "New York" -- the western third was marked "California." And the middle third was labeled "The Great American Desert." The people of Nebraska and this nation cannot afford to risk the contamination of the Sand Hills area and the Ogallala Aquifer and become the Great American Desert. The pipeline route must be moved.    After reading the analysis between the State Department and TransCanada, and finding out about the relationships between former State Department employees and TransCanada, I no longer trust the State Department to make an unbiased decision.    I petition President Obama to reject this application for this pipeline through the aquifer area. Nebraska leaders, including the Governor, and the legislature that has been a day late and a dollar short in protecting Nebraska's land and water resources. I urge the state leaders to do their job to protect Nebraska resources, and to do it now. Remember, this is Nebraska. If the farmers and ranchers are out of work, we're all out of work.    
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker No. 120  
MR. DeFRUITER: My name is David DeFruiter. I am an information technology administrator here in Lincoln. I grew up on a farm near Gothenburg, Nebraska. I helped my father raise sugar beets, and I understand the importance of land and water resources to the economy of Nebraska, United States, the world. I am very concerned about the potential negative impact of the Keystone pipeline and Nebraska's land and water resources. I understand that the State Department's environmental impact study was conducted by the same independent contractor that completed the British Petroleum Company study. We saw how well that worked out.    To President Obama, to the State Department, and to Nebraska's Governor and the Legislature, TransCanada's Keystone pipeline needs to be rerouted around the Sand Hills and the Ogallala Aquifer. Make it happen.    
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker 121.  
MR. CUNNINGHAM: My name is Nicholas Cunningham. I'm a carpenter, I'm a third year geography/geology student at the University of Nebraska at Omaha. A lot of people have very compelling evidence as to why this should not be built. For me, I can't even believe this debate after the BP explosion.    We understand that corporations always look at their bottom line. They will make shortcuts, they won't hold shortcuts. As a carpenter, I have worked in the construction field. I'm not saying that these guys are inept at what they do, but we all make mistakes. And if they say they don't make mistakes, they're either a liar or they're God. And I don't think God's going to be a pipefitter. There should not be any debate about putting our water supply at risk; there should not be a debate about the fact that we need to move forward as a nation and find other energy. Thank you. That's all I have to say.    
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you.  
MS. NELSON: Hello. My name is Daya Nelson, I'm a lifelong Nebraska resident. I have a lot more stories, but I'm getting to the point. I would like everyone to consider the source of this bitumen being extracted from the Athabasca tar sands of Northern Alberta, in Canada. The Environmental Defense Fund called the extraction of the Athabasca tar sands "the world's most destructive project" where an area of land the size of Florida is going to be stripped of its forest and vegetation and then strip mined, extracting tar sands oil creates three times more greenhouse gases than conventional oil, and we know that. For every barrel of oil reclaimed from the rendering of tar sands, six barrels of contaminated, toxic water remain. The State Department's Environmental Impact Statement says nothing of the massive environmental costs that originate from tar sands extraction, and I would like to know why. In this era of globalization, why do you choose to ignore this destruction taking place on an unprecedented scale?    Though I may be a patriotic American, my care and concern for people, animals, plants and water does not stop at the boundaries of the United States.    My sense of what's right does not stop at the concerns of merely for my family or my community, my state or my country. I care about the whole world.    And I know I'm not the only one here who can see beyond the boundaries of my own state and nation. Earlier I saw that TransCanada estimated 20,000 jobs maximum would be created with this pipeline. One speaker earlier today said South Dakota was promised thousands of jobs with the original Keystone pipeline, but actual jobs only numbered in the hundreds. For the sake of argument, let's weigh the exaggerated estimates of 20,000 jobs to be created with the construction of this pipeline. Let's weigh 20,000 jobs with the toxic environmental disaster that is tar sands oil production. In some cases, a 30-fold increase has been seen in heavy metals downstream: mercury, arsenic, beryllium, copper, cadmium, thallium, lead, nickel, zinc and silver downstream from industrial tar sands development sites. Huge increases in cancer have been documented in the populations living downstream from tar sands mining sites. The contaminated water I mentioned earlier is held in tailings ponds. These are the dregs of the process, the toxic waste these tar sands oil producers do not know what to do with. The bitumen remaining in the water kills any wildlife that uses these ponds, and then the ponds inevitably leak and contaminate land, rivers and groundwater in Canada. Though the government of Alberta has tried to prevent the release of data on the toxicity and pollution to the public, these facts are true: American, it would seem, we're so desperate that we need these 20,000 short-term jobs so bad that any cost is worth it -- Okay, I'll get to the point. Finally, tar sands oil from TransCanada is going to net us 5 percent of U.S. oil consumption. One percent of world production. We are here to say that we don't want our land and water polluted. I am saying that we need to factor in the environmental costs of tar sands oil production. Surely if we feel this way as Nebraskans and as Americans, we can pull together to just reduce our consumption by 5 percent.    Thank you.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Speaker No. 127.  
MS. WOLF: Hi. My name is Kathy Wolf. I grew up in Central Nebraska and I now live here in Lincoln; I'm a teacher. I'm speaking in opposition to the TransCanada Keystone XL pipeline project to be routed directly over the Ogallala Aquifer and the porous land of the Nebraska Sand Hills. Tar sands oil is only an expensive delay in our pursuit of renewable forms of energy. Very small, short term gains are not worth the gigantic long term risks posed by this project. With depth to groundwater being only 10 feet over 65 miles of the proposed XL route in Nebraska, there's a very real danger of groundwater contamination of one of the world's largest fresh water aquifers and one that makes possible one of the most productive agricultural economies. If TransCanada's goal is to be able to reach the ports of Texas, all the company need do is extent the current pipeline rather than build an entirely new one. It has refused to consider that option or to reroute, and has instead deceived and intimidated landowners all along the proposed route, bullying them with threats of eminent domain. If the company had a decent argument in favor of its project, it would not need to resort to unethical strong arm tactics like these.    Given the illogic of its attempts to gain approval for this pipeline, I suspect that the transport of tar sands oil is only a smokescreen for a longer term goal, for this company to have access to the water in the aquifer, assuming they don't pollute it beyond use first.    At some point in the not-so-distant future, fresh water will be far more economically valuable than oil. Do we really want to hand over access to the Ogallala Aquifer to a multinational corporation?  In addition to our ecosystem and local economy, your own credibility as a State Department is at stake in this issue.    Now that the link between TransCanada lobbyists and Secretary Clinton's presidential campaign is common knowledge, this project, approval of this project would only further prove the corrupt nature of the State Department's dealings on this pipeline question. There are many reasons, environmental, economic and political to deny TransCanada the ability to build the Keystone XL. And if the State Department won't stop it, I plead with President Obama to step and do the right thing. Thank you.    
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker No. 128.  
MR. MARY: I'm Brian Mary, born in Lincoln, live here still. Thank you for these hearings. A year ago, Jeff Rowl , a spokesman for TransCanada, said they were going to spend a billion dollars to sell this Keystone XL pipeline on advertising here in Nebraska. And of course the other front groups have spent even more; Americans for Prosperity, Tea Party Express, American Petroleum Institute, they've even run ads calling a proposal to give tax credits for companies converting their trucks to natural gas, which would be cleaner, more plentiful, cheaper, calling that a tax-and-spend boondoggle, as though any challenge to their monopoly on our land and water and lives is something that they've got to shut down. This ad says the Keystone XL pipeline will be the safest pipeline ever built in Nebraska. Of course how can this be the case when over a year ago the Michigan Messenger, covering the Enbridge pipeline spill in the Kalamazoo river of a million gallons of tar sands crude, bitumen mixed with solvents such as benzene said, "According to the U.S. Geological Survey, tar sands oil has vastly more aluminum, copper, nickel, lead, titanium and vanadium than other forms of oil." Cold lake crude in particular is also known to have around three times as much sulfur as conventional oil; a factor the EPA has warned could lead to pipeline corrosion. Others have warned it can result in increased air pollution. On Omaha right wing radio station, heard president or vice president of TransCanada saying that this would be no different from any other oil --  an obvious lie -- and that a spill would move no more than a foot in ten years. Someone here earlier said three feet in ten years. I know that if I pour a quart of oil out on some wet sandy soil, it's going to move more than that. So not being able to fool anyone that this would be the safest pipeline ever built in Nebraska, they've moved on to claiming that, according to this, which Speaker 100 referred to, would create more than 342,000 American jobs. I suppose they thought an uneven number would be more believable --  I suppose no one told the brightly painted tractor-trailer truck out here that claims 13,000 jobs, or the TransCanada president or vice-president on the Omaha station who said 1700 jobs. Now this is sort of like Senator Joe McCarthy talking about how many communists in the State Department; it's a different number every time.  But let's talk about what we're really talking about here, and that is that it's not going to move just a foot or three foot in ten years; I've heard maybe it could go hundreds of miles, the plume could spread. And it's not that we can't water crops or livestock or ourselves on water that's to some degree more or less contaminated; it's just that cancers and birth defects and organ failures would increase at a greater or lesser degree.    And it's just not practical to think that we can continue to burn more and more fossil fuel to meet our energy needs when the geological record shows that when there's more carbon in the atmosphere it's warmer, and that those Sand Hills have been sand dunes in the past, and that more storms, weakening of the jet stream along with the weakening of the ocean currents, bringing more floods and droughts -- well, that's not going to be very good for our economy here, either. And just finally -- I know I've been given the 'thank you' but I'd just like to say that it's the Koch Brothers and Koch Industries' tar sands that would be taken from the terminal which is the starting point of this pipeline, and that they are your main enemies, the Obama Administration, the unions -- they will wage war on the unions; I can understand how any pipeline or any jobs, even a few hundred temporary jobs, which is -- the official State Department analysis said it would only a few hundred jobs and that most of those would be temporary, and your administration. They wage war on your administration. How can you possibly follow their dictates? Thank you.    
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker No. 130.  
MS. HOSPODKA: I will be brief. I'm Linda Hospodka. My maiden name was Smith. I am from Chadron, Nebraska originally. My family has, I won't say deep roots, but extensive roots in Cherry County, in the Sand Hills. I live in Omaha, I raised my family in Lincoln. I travel through the Sand Hills on a regular basis to visit relatives and just to go through the beauty, the respite of the beauty and the calmness and the peacefulness of the Sand Hills. I don't want to see that disturbed, and I don't want the State and this country put in danger by a company that has proved to be untruthful and untrustworthy.    I want my children and my six grandchildren and their offspring and so on to live in a State where our food is grown, where the livestock is fed off the land, and sent all around the country and the world to feed others -- I don't want to see that destroyed. When I drive through the Sand Hills, particularly in the fall -- and I hope you get a chance to do that. Notice how the grasses change colors. You'll see things in the Sand Hills of Nebraska that you won't see anywhere else in the world.    I don't want that disturbed or destroyed, and disturbing could destroy it. I've seen drought. I've seen floods. I don't think that TransCanada can assure us that they won't cause harm to our state and our country. The pollution potential is extreme. Please, please, I hope you have received the message that was given to you today from our hearts.    
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker 134.  
MR. NEWINGHAM: Thank you for keeping your promise. My name is Ronald Newingham, and I live in Louisville Rural, which is pretty far to the eastern side of Nebraska. My credentials are simply that I'm a Nebraskan and I have been a union member all my life. I don't belong to the orange or the red this year today, but I do resent the extreme labeling by suits and entrepreneur, because I don't agree with the proposed pipeline. I find it amazing that a 12 year old girl from Bellevue has more common sense than most people that I've seen here today.    My issues, though, are over the government speaking from both sides of its mouth. I resent my government doing that to me. And I say that because Senator Johanns asked the State Department to do another study on proposed rating. They assigned an agency from their own department -- they came up with a second and third routing, and the State Department denied the routing because it said it was environmentally unfriendly due to the extra miles in the United States. Well, if that be true then why, when Senator Johanns came up with the solution to run this pipeline through Canada easterly until it got to the easement that's already owned; and the eastern edge of the Dakotas, Nebraska and Kansas and run it down to Steele City, one of its routing marks in the maps -- and everybody has this available to them. That it was denied, but even at that, Senator Johanns' routing was less miles than the proposed route already. What is it? Is it the miles of the routing that makes it environmentally unfriendly, or that Mr. Johanns' proposal that he says that maybe from that point in Steele City we can go easterly to St. Louis and the refineries there and have them process the oil there, and then the Midwesterners would get some benefit out that. But like I said, his route was denied. Because it meets, the reason for this in my opinion, it needs to go to the Bakken oil fields, which this government and big business wants. And the maps and in the fact handouts it says right here: The proposed project is also capable of transporting U.S. crude oil to the desired delivery point. That delivery points are, the Port of Houston and the Port of -- port of Arthur, and Louisiana. Then that would be shipped out. I see this map to be in our national interest; I see this to be in business interest. My issue here is, if you come with a problem and an argument, you come with a fix. And I unfortunately only have fix probably for two-thirds of it. The labor, which I support, and the people that want to protect the aquifer. And as I state here, in the aquifer there are two issues that can do this. One, I am saying, raise the standard of the material because if the line falters it will be blamed on labor; Two, run it simply from the northern edge of Nebraska where it's got to enter over the approximate 100 miles east to the existing easement; continue on south as laid out. That's a minimal of 100 miles, that protects the aquifer, and at least it will give two-thirds of the bodies here satisfaction. Do not let this administration make another embarrassing decision. Thank you.    
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker No. 135.  
MS. SHAW: Thank you. My name is Sarah Shaw -- I'm going to make this very brief. I'm a citizen of the world, first and foremost. I am a U.S. citizen, I'm a Nebraskan, and I am a mother. I also want to tell you, I am not here paid, I left work early today, because this issue is so important.    This pipeline is not in our national interest. The permit must be rejected. The Ogallala Aquifer is the largest aquifer in the whole world, and it must be protected.    If this pipeline is approved, I ask you to think about what our children, our grandchildren and our great grandchildren will say. They will ask us: What were you thinking? You had the knowledge and yet you did not act. Make the right decision and reject the pipeline. Thank you.    
MS. HOBGOOD: Speaker No. 136.  
MS. WATSON: Hi. Thanks for being here today and thank you to all the people who left early that I could speak. Appreciate that. I have a whole lot to say, and it certainly wouldn't fit into three minutes, so I'll be sending my written comments as well. But I do want to make a couple points. There are a lot of things about this pipeline that concern every single one of us in this room, and obviously with the turnout you can see such a concern. I'm concerned about a few things; we know it's not in the national interest, we know this oil is not guaranteed to go to anyone in this country -- except what you spill on our land.    I want to tell you a little bit about myself. My name is Susan. I was born here in Lincoln, still live here in Lincoln; I was gone a couple years, but pretty much I'm a Nebraskan all the way, through my heart. Both sides of my family came here over a hundred years ago, to Nebraska. We've been in the Midwest a lot longer than that, and in the States a lot longer than that. My grandmother came to this country in a covered wagon. Came to the State in a covered wagon -- she didn't need oil. And I'm now a grandmother who is fighting to make sure that the water stays clean for every generation to come, and not just my own granddaughter but for everybody in this room. I also want to thank the unions for busing in people, and even the people who came in here from Illinois and Iowa and Nevada that we've had the pleasure of meeting today, because you've proven the point that not all these jobs are going to go to Nebraskans, they're not going to go to Lincoln people.    And I can tell you Nebraskans are some of the most decent folks I've ever known, if you can find anyone on this planet. Americans are some of the most decent folks you're going to find on this planet. We're desperate for jobs; even I'm desperate for a job, but I don't think any of us are willing to sacrifice American lives and American livelihoods for a job, temporary or permanent.    We need to come up with solutions, but this pipeline is not the solution, and I'm really honestly upset. I'm American citizen, I expect my American government to be protecting me and my fresh water --    -- not me having to come here and beg you to protect me from a foreign company that wants to put a pipeline in my drinking water.    Please do the right thing; deny this pipeline. We are here going through the process, begging you to take care of us and look out for us. Please do at the right thing; deny the pipeline.    
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you.  
MR. LARRICK: Good evening. I'm Steve Larrick and I want to thank you for being here and listening to the people of Nebraska. I feel very proud to be a Nebraskan, having heard all the testimony today --    -- and I thank everybody for speaking out. I think it's a very important issue for us here. Lincoln, Nebraska is the home of the Groundwater Foundation, which projects educational materials allover the world. The Groundwater Foundation works all around the world, even with the Pentagon, trying to clean up their act; and that's a big job. So we take our water seriously, and we're also looking at the long-term health of the planet; and I think continuing dependence on gasoline-run automobiles is not in the national interest; it's not in the interest of the planet. We really need to move in a new direction, and I feel sympathy for the union workers who were here earlier in the day, and their desire for jobs and dealing with our country's energy crisis. But this is not the solution, and there are many more jobs that will come from investment in clean, renewable energy, with the wind energy, solar energy, geothermal and all other types of energy that we can create.    As many said, we have a lot of inventors and I think we just need to get this movement moving forward now, and this is a great example, when we put something of such value to us under such a threat. And you know, just under that high pressure and the heat and the corrosive nature of this oil, it's definitely going to be a disaster for our State. So I hope you'll listen to the people and act accordingly. Thank you.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you.    
MS. HOBGOOD: Speaker No. 139.  
MS. DiBERNARD: I'd also like to thank you for being here today, and for listening to us. My name is Barbara DiBernard, I'm a 33-year resident of Nebraska, a nature lover and bird watcher. I'm opposed to TransCanada XL pipeline and urge you to recommend denial of the permit to build it. The pipeline is not in the national interest of the United States. I grew up in New Jersey, a state which is densely populated and which has few remaining large tracts of natural beauty. The first time I visited the Sand Hills of Nebraska, I was enraptured by the beauty of the land and the wildlife, particularly the birds that it supports. Here are some reasons to oppose the pipeline: American Avocets, Black Necked Stilts, Whimbrels, Ruddy Ducks, Long-Billed Curiews, and the endangered Whooping Crane. Here are other reasons to oppose the pipeline: Ava, Zefinaya, Cloe, Eli, Belli, Marcus and Samantha, our children and grandchildren. There will be leaks and spills from the pipeline; that is one thing supporters and opponents agree on. TransCanada admits there will be leaks and spills, the Environmental Impact Statement agrees, and Professor Stansbury from the University of Nebraska has shown that the number can be as high as 91 significant leaks over 50 years. We do not know fully how these spills will affect the aquifer and the people and wildlife who depend on it. But the potential is for serious and widespread damage. The Keystone XL pipeline is not in the national interest of the United States. I want to take up just one other issue which we've heard about several times today. Why, when the pipeline is being promoted as freeing the U.S. from dependence on oil from the Mideast does TransCanada want to pipe it 1700 miles through the center of the U.S. to the refineries of Texas and the Port of Houston? According to an article by Judy Gordon, which was published by Reuters just three days ago, 97 percent of Canadian oil exports currently go to the U.S. Joe Oliver, the Canadian minister in charge of energy is quoted in that article as saying, quote: "It is critically important that for us to diversify our customer base we hope to be an increasingly important supplier of energy to China." So the Canadian energy minister is saying outright they want to send their oil to China. And since, as other speakers have pointed out, the Enbridge Northern Gateway Pipeline, which is planned to go to British Columbia for shipment to China, is facing tremendous opposition particularly from First Nations groups. So they're somewhat slimy there; so now they want to come through Nebraska and the Central United States. We do not want to serve the quote, "diversified customer base" that TransCanada is seeking.    Building a pipeline to make a transnational corporation able to ship their dirty oil to China is not in our national interest; it's not in our global interest. I say no to the pipeline and to the alternative route, as other speakers, Steve Larrick just said, "we have to get off our addiction to crude oil." Please deny the permit.    
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker 141.  
MR. KNAKE: My name is Willis Knake, and I'm from White Pine, Nebraska, and I just want to say thanks for being here, and I ask you to go back to Hillary Clinton and Barack Obama and ask them to deny this pipeline. That's all I've got to say.    
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you.  
MS. HLAVA: My name is Teri Hlava. I grew up in the Sand Hills and I've worked and lived all across the State, including Nebraska for over ten years. When my thoughts are stressed, I go to sleep. And sometimes I wake up in the morning and the answers have just appeared in the form of clarity. Maybe you've experienced that. This morning those answers came in the form of an analogy. And when I tell you what that is, I don't mean it to be shocking or offensive; I do want it to be memorable. Simply interpreted, regarding the XL pipeline engaging itself with our underground water aquifer, the analogy is this: TransCanada, stay out of our pants. CEOs of the pipeline will continue their polished words, words such as "Trust me, I'm your friend. I love you and will provide for you. There's no risk and we are handing you utopia." Just are not so. More importantly, it is objectively and repeatedly evident from science, scientists and may others who really know and respect our land and water, that the risk these oil companies, many foreign, want to take with the most vital and treasured resource of the state is not a wide venture. And resource of the state does translate into resource of this nation. My heart, my soul, my guts, my instinct; and yes, my brain tells me that the right thing to do is keep the pipeline out of our pants. To some, the temptation and titillation has been felt. The promises of short term jobs and improved economy lights a false and short term hope for a few, though facts and figures show that selling our state's body and blood for these measly pieces of silver are folly when compared to what we can realistically lose. Recently there was a long public letter in the Lincoln Journal Star from the CEO on Omaha who is directly linked to the XL pipeline endeavors. As I read his "trust me" words, I also noticed a distinct disdain for those Nebraskans who couldn't see his vision of utopia. He appeared to view them as stupid, ignorant, extremist and uninformed. In today's world, farmers and those reputable in agriculture are in effect scientists. They are also wise enough to know that they must guard the land and water from avoidable contamination. And the last thing they are is stupid. I recognize this person's letter as attempting something that bullies attempt when they feel their power is being challenged. That strategy is to poke fun at those who hold a differing view of life. Make fun of, call names, and basically intimidate was his strategy and message. This is similar intimidation used to of course the landowners who were threatened -- and by the way, paid pennies for promising the penetration of their land with the pipeline. Nebraska students rank in the top 2 percent of the nation's school achievers, and the highest are the ones who are educated in the smaller schools within that Sand Hills region. My vote is that those pushing their penetrators of political power, money, intimidation and titillation will not get in the pants of Nebraska and the national interest. Condoms and pipes both leak, and don't have the best record over abstinence of shown and known real mistaking. What they are willing to risk is too valuable for any individual or entity to endanger. TransCanada's record of trustworthiness and safety, kindness and respect and true integrity for safeguarding our largest resource is simply not there. I believe they have just begun to experience what might known as the Cornhusker momentum. My father lastly --  
MS. HOBGOOD: If you can wrap up your comments, please.  
MS. HLAVA: Lastly, my father was inducted into the Great Navy of the State of Nebraska by Governor Charles Doene. Much of the reason for this prestigious award was his untiring efforts in both economic development and preservation of our natural resources; mainly the sea filtered through our precious Ogallala Aquifer. Final sentence: Some of his greatest strengths were in the area of economic development, that he knew that if the state's natural resources were not held in awe, and shown the utmost proactive respect, economic development was a mute endeavor. Thank you.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you.    
MS. HOBGOOD: Before I give the floor to Speaker No. 143, some of you may be wondering, since the Federal Register notice indicated that we would be ending the public meeting at 8 p.m. how much further we will have this public meeting. What I'd like to do, because we did take a break between 3:30 and 4, I would like to continue having Nebraskans express their view until 8:30, with your permission.    And if you can keep your remarks as succinct as possible so we can get as many people in to speak, we'd really appreciate it. Thank you.  
MR. RUSH: Hi, my name is Tim Rush, and I will try to make this as brief as possible. I live and work here in Lincoln, I was born and raised in the Sand Hills, I grew up working on my family's ranch in Cherry County, and I've seen how instable the land is there, a lot of good points have already been made. I've scratched off almost everything that I was going to say. But I'd still like to bring out two big holes in the EIS that made me laugh when I read it. The first one is, quote: "Spills may be identified during regular pipeline aerial inspections by ground patrols and maintenance staff or by landowners or passersby in the vicinity of the spill." This statement does not inspire me with confidence. What good will aerial inspections be to a buried pipeline? And if you're going to count on landowners and passersby to help identify a potential spill in the wide open, sparsely populated Sand Hills area, it seems to me that a slow leak could go undetected indefinitely. They're going to be monitoring these leaks with pressure, basically; if you've got a pinhole leak it will go on for who knows how long? It's buried, how are they going to find this thing? And it's the Sand Hills. I've seen motor oil -- they say that this thing is viscous like motor oil. Well, I've spilled motor oil in the Sand Hills. It disappears. It goes into the ground. So I don't know if it's soluble, whatever. So you've got all these experts, all these experts on every side, okay? And you don't know who to believe. But it's common sense, you could have a problem in the Sand Hills, maybe. So if you just don't put the pipeline over the Sand Hills, you will not have a problem.    That is just a common sense solution to the problem. I mean, just 100 percent guaranteed solution is already -- Keystone pipeline is already there, and that brings up the second  quote from the EIS: Although there is sufficient pipeline capacity from Canada to the U.S. in general to accommodate projected additional imports of Canadian crude in the short to medium term, there is extremely limited pipeline transport capacity to move such crude oils to Gulf Coast refineries. So everybody knows where the Gulf Coast --  why the Gulf Coast? Whatever. But we already have the pipeline that we need, we don't need any more pipeline for short to medium term. I don't know how long medium term is, but that seems like "a while." So, I mean, they're not operating this pipeline that they already have at full capacity. This is -- I mean, if you're talking about the interests of our nation, then you're talking about giving our nation oil. And I love Canada. I went to college in Canada. My best friend is a Canadian. I'm all for Canada. And they're great people up there, I guarantee you that. But it's just -- they don't need the pipeline to bring to the United States; they need the pipeline to bring it to the open market. So thank you for your time. Please reject the permit for the pipeline.    
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker 144.  
MR. JALLOT: Good evening. My name is Mohammed Jallot. I'm a fourth generation Nebraskan and a farmer. I'm here to add a voice to Nebraska to say no to the XL pipeline. I think this is just a bad idea. We can do better than that. This is not just about jobs and revenues; it is about life. What is life? You know. We call it life, we could be talking about jobs or revenues, you know. So we need to put our water first, before we talk about jobs. So it's about jobs; we can say no to this. The XL idea was bad yesterday; and it's bad today. That would be disastrous for future generations tomorrow. So it's just a bad idea, so we can no to it and we can do better than that. Tell President Obama and Hillary Clinton that, you know, this shouldn't be an issue we should be talking about. We have what a lot of people have said yesterday, it's just not something that we can tolerate in Nebraska, I think. We can't jeopardize our water system, so please say no to it. They said -- I would say this -- see, if one frog would lead a group of frogs, they're the one that would get sense, they take caution. It translates: If a frog leading a group of frogs falls into a ditch, the clever ones take caution, you know. We've all seen what has happened in the Gulf Coast, the oil spills out there. We've seen what has happened in Japan, and you know, you guys have written about what's been happening in Ogoniland in Nigeria, you know. These examples are not good examples; so why are we still going ahead with talking about this XL gas pipeline? So let's just say no to it, there are so many unknowns, there are so many unanswered questions, so let's not jeopardize the state of Nebraskans for their greedy or -- I don't know the corporation's name. It's just a bad idea. Thank you.    
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you.  
MS. WRIGHT: My name is Ginny Wright, and I'm from Lincoln. Thank you for your courtesy and endurance. Appreciate it. I'm here to speak against the pipeline in its entirety. Simply moving it to another location does not solve a number of the issues. When I read that Governor Heineman had sent a letter to the State Department and to the President against the pipeline, I was stunned. I could not believe that Governor Heineman and I were in agreement.  And honestly, I called his office to say thank you. And I asked that I be able to explain why I appreciated his letters against the pipeline, including that the leak problems, the technology problems, the stuff that you've heard already, we simply don't need to volunteer for those issues to come into our state. I felt like it's too expensive, it's bad for the climate, people think they're going to get tax income. Will it be enough tax income revenue to cover the expenses of repair or cleanup when the accidents happen? The toxicity of the stuff moving through the pipe, the brain damage that will be caused, the grief caused to families that their anticipated child now has retardation, other brain conditions because of the mercury, the arsenic, et cetera. How are we going to repair that and make that right? The corporations have richly deserved our mistrust, and I will not be complicit with their lying, their misrepresentation, their bullying, their lack of concern for the nature, people, the whole gamut by assenting to this. I strongly recommend denying this request in its entirety. Moving it will not save the environment.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you.    
MS. HOBGOOD: Speaker 148.  
MR. SPOTZ: Hello, everybody. My name is Dylan Spotz, I am a Butler County resident, fifth generation Nebraskan. I severely oppose the pipeline that is proposed through the Sand Hills of Western- Central Nebraska. This proposed pipeline is going to be running through highly erodable soil, through the largest collection of grass-covered sand dunes in the Western Hemisphere. We can't have it. We cannot. I just have to say we can't let this go, we can't. This is our last gasp, and if this is a democracy, our voice needs to be heard. We're here today to let our voice be heard. Please.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you.    
MS. HOBGOOD: Speaker 150.  
MS. SPEAKER: Economic and energy security concerns weigh heavily on us as a nation. The responsibility that you all have for so many people is fraught with many complexities and difficult decisions. I appreciate this, and I thank you for your willingness to come here today and listen to us. The Keystone pipeline project seems like a good option to ease some of these concerns, even though it's clear that this is a short term solution. The temporary help it affords to the nation as a whole, to the detriment of fewer people, the land and other species, seems to outweigh the cost. As we consider this, though, I invite everyone to listen to the words of Dr. Wungari Matai {ph} of Kenya. Nobel Peace Laureate, honored for her work in environmental stewardship, empowering women in peaceful resistance to violence, biology professor and chair of her department and founder of the Greenbelt Movement whom the world sadly lost on Sunday to cancer. But who still speaks to us in these times of decision-making. This is from an interview with NPR's Michele Martin, who asks Dr. Matai if she has a message for folks who feel that environmentalism is too far removed from their present situation. Here's her response: Adapting and adopting new techniques and new ways of life-style really is an investment governments have to make a choice about. Because if you don't help your citizens to adapt, you are nevertheless going to deal with the problems of rising seas, melting snows, drying up rivers and all that. Michele Martin's next question: These are long term outcomes, but often people, especially those fighting for survival, feel that they don't have the luxury of considering the long view. Do you find that to be the case? Dr. Matai responds: Yes. Quite often, that's the way people feel. They feel that they don't have time. We often say that poor people will often cut their last tree to cook their last meal. What the poor people have to ask themselves is if they want to put themselves in that situation or would they rather do whatever it takes to make sure that they don't reach that stage. I believe that this administration was elected because it truly wanted to promote change, and obviously the people want it as well. We are looking for leaders with a vision who will make the hard decisions. Help us adapt and adopt a new life-style as a nation, learn new skills for different jobs, and lead us to change before we reach a time where we are forced to cut down our last tree to cook our last meal. Or put the last drop of fuel in our car to drive to the store to get our last bottle of water.    We as Americans must also do our part; we must support this change by stepping our efforts to become less depending on nonrenewable forms of energy. It will take a great effort to do it on the scale of a nation, but with the leadership of a truly committed government we can all support one another. Thank you.    
MS. HOBGOOD: Speaker No. 151.  
MS. BROWN: My name is Jill Brown, and I have a very brief statement; and that is, I am opposed to the pipeline. I think we're at a turning point for our whole country and a turning point for all of us who live in this state. We need to protect the aquifer. And that's my statement.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you.    
MS. HOBGOOD: Speaker No. 156.  
MS. HAMILTON: I'm really amazed I got up here today. Thank you so much for your time, for coming to Nebraska, and for being so respectful of all of us as we tell you our side of the story; I really appreciate it. My name is Margo Hamilton. I am a born, raised, educated right here in Lincoln, Nebraska; although now I live on a small farm near Ceresco, Nebraska. This morning I woke up and I had the pleasure of seeing a snowy white egret right off the wetlands, just south of my house. Since I've lived here, lots of my friends have moved away. They've moved to New York City, Washington, D.C., San Francisco, Chicago, St. Louis, all over the place -- bright lights, big city, really exciting. I've watched numerous elections and marveled as the place I love is called 'flyover state.' Somebody really wise today told me just to speak from the heart, and my heart is solidly here in Nebraska. I love this state and I love these people, even the pipefitters and people who are desperate for jobs that they would ally themselves with people who bully us. I'm here to say that you might be able to fly over my State, but TransCanada is not going to bully Nebraskans to burrowing under my state.    Thank you.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker No. 158.  
MS. ROMERO: Thank you for being with me and all of us today. I appreciate it. My name is Angel Romero, I'm a proud born and raised Nebraskan, and I can stand up here along with everybody that's been here all day and spout out facts and numbers, pros to why we're here against it; cons to why we want to keep it away, but I would love to commend all of the Nebraskans here today who have done a wonderful job educating you guys; and it goes to show that if all of Nebraskans have taken the time and done the research to dig into the facts that it's a vital issue to us, and our land. Without our land, without our water, we are nothing in this State. We can't drink oil, we can't spray our crops with oil, we can't feed our cattle with oil. That would run our livelihood. And I would like to say, you guys have gotten a little glimpse of what my life has been like for over the last year and a half. I'm a community organizer. I've spend the days over in the last year and a half meeting all of these wonderful Nebraskans, all of the landowners. All of these people who have such great fear of being bullied by this company, and that are being bullied by this company. They want to keep this company out. You've had a day to listen to our concerns, why we don't want it, the facts of why we don't want it here. A lot of us have put some emotion into that. But I spent over a year and a half of my life meeting these people who are now friends and family, joining bonds with the great state of Nebraska and all of the citizens here. So I would love that your message take back the portion of what you got to see was driven by emotion; but the true emotion that us Nebraskans have been dealing with while our livelihood is in the balance, waiting for your decision, is not -- this today does not even come close to seeing the emotion and the fear that we have here. And I reach out to you, Hillary Clinton and President Obama to stop the Keystone XL pipeline. It is not something Nebraskans want, it is not something Nebraskans need, and it is for the better of the country that we say no to the 
XL. Thank you.    
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. I think we have time for two more speakers; Speaker 159.  
MR. RUBIN: Thank you. My name is Barry Rubin. I am resident of Douglas County, Nebraska, I'm the former Executive Director of the Nebraska Democratic Party, and currently speak on behalf of over 19,000 members now of Nebraskans for jobs and energy security. I'm here today to tell you that TransCanada's Keystone XL pipeline is very important to our nation's security and prosperity. You have certainly heard passionate arguments both for and against the Keystone XL pipeline, and I value and respect the opinion of all of those who speak up. But over the past several months, attacks perpetuated by those who would rather we all ride bicycles to work every day have poisoned the environment in which logical, coherent and adult discussions can be had regarding this proposed pipeline. We've seen everything from arrests at the White House of Darryl Hanna, whom I assume is a climate change expert via her role as a mermaid. Beanie babies, flashlights, corn fingers. We've also seen threats and personal attacks on any person, elected or otherwise who happens to possess a different point of view on the subject of whether or not this pipeline should be built. We've also heard outright lies from opponents of the pipeline, intended to incite anger and instill fear and hysteria. We've heard allegations of bullying laymen. And more than 90 percent of all landowners, 95 percent of landowners in the Sand Hills have agreed to easements. We've heard that the oil will go to China, but you all at the State Department debunked this red herring in the Final Environmental Impact Statement. We've heard that the State of Nebraska has new laws to protect Nebraskans from an oil spill. When state statutes and the Department of Environment Quality's own administrator provides protections, in addition to the federal requirements already in place. And we've heard over and over that the source of Nebraska's drinking water is at risk, when Nebraska's own preeminent experts and the FEIS make it clear that it's not. Those that oppose the pipeline seek to compensate for the lack of factual evidence through repetition of untruths, of character assassination, through childish attacks on pipeline supporters. Need I say more? You can listen behind me. Much of the hysteria, as I like to call it, comes from the group that more often that not support issues, causes and candidates on my side of the aisle. But this is not a Republican or Democratic issue; it's an issue of common sense. The fact is we need oil, and contrary to the reasons you have heard from pipeline opponents today, the simple truth and motivation behind their well-funded political attacks is that they don't want us to use oil. Don't be fooled into believing that these groups will be perfectly happy if Trane Canada or you folks at the State Department decide to move the route, because they're just going to draw a new line in the sand. We need new revenue and job creators, and this is exactly the type of project we should be encouraging. $150 million in tax revenue just in Nebraska alone over its lifetime. 20,000 direct jobs nationwide, over 100,000 spinoff jobs nationwide, with over 7500 in Nebraska alone. Hotels and motels and restaurants filled, and a company, TransCanada, who has agreed to hire the most highly skilled workers in Nebraska and up and down the route, and pay them family-supporting wages and benefits. What we don't need is our federal government to stand in the way of progress and prosperity and national security. And most important to me is the opportunity we as Nebraskans have to be on the front lines of our nation's efforts to reduce our dependence on antagonistic foreign sources of oil. Thanks.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you.    And our last speaker, Speaker No. 160.  
MS. SPEAKER: Thank you. I'm a guest from Washington. It really is an honor, and we do appreciate your endurance and your patience, sense of humor. My point is very different; it's a point made by a cockeyed optimist who has been terribly depressed, but not really, about the number of people that say "Oh, you can't do anything about it. It's big business, it's big money. Forget it. It's a done deal." But the reason I left a career, a beautiful career in professional music in Germany was hearing time and time again "You can't do anything about it, it's politics, it's big business." But over the north, the main entrance of our state capital are the words, "The salvation of a state is watchfulness in the citizen."    And months ago, when I began to collect clippings regarding the pipeline issue, there was an article attributed to the McClatchy newspaper about American's pledge to reduce greenhouse gases is in conflict with its monetary interests, or our climate vows, it spoke. And I'm from the age, end of The War, where I was taught to respect the office, if not necessarily the office holder. And I do; I have that child's desire to look at the president of my country with respect; and all other offices of government and of the law, and the military. But it's time for me to move on, wake up, grow up, be a bit realistic but never give up that desire to do that little bit that I have, that I can. As Helen Keller said, "I am only one, but I am one. I cannot do everything, but I can do something. And because I cannot do everything, I will not refuse to do the something that I can do." Thank you for carrying our message to Washington.    
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Before we end the public meeting, I would just like to thank everyone. I would like to thank you for the expression of your views; there's been considerable passion in this room during the course of the day. And I would like to emphasize that the State Department has not made a decision. Your views are very important to us and they will be a matter of public record. If you have not had an opportunity to speak, please do not hesitate to submit your comments in writing. You can leave them with us today; you can also send your comments in by e-mail, by fax. The comments will be accepted through midnight of October 9th. Again, thank you for your graciousness and for your civility. The public meeting has ended.     