U.S. DEPARTMENT OF STATE KEYSTONE XL PIPELINE OIL PROJECT PUBLIC MEETING Ronald Reagan Building 1300 Pennsylvania Avenue, N.W. Washington, D.C.  Friday, October 7, 2011 The public meeting commenced at 10:00 a.m., Maryruth Coleman and Jim Steele, presiding officers. P R O C E E D I N G  
MR. STEELE: It's now just after 10 o'clock so let's go ahead and get started. My name is Jim Steele. I'm from the Bureau of Oceans, Environment and International Environmental and Scientific Affairs at the U.S. Department of State.  My colleague, Maryruth Coleman is from the State Department's Bureau of Economic and Business Affairs. We're here today to listen to your comments regarding the national interest determination for the proposed Keystone XL pipeline. The State Department is committed to a transparent, impartial, and rigorous process to determine whether the proposed Keystone XL pipeline project is in the national interest.  As part of the national interest determination process, the Department is following a process that is defined by law and executive order.  That includes input from eight federal agencies, experts in relevant subjects, and the public. This broader evaluation of the application extends beyond environmental impact. It takes into account economic, energy security, foreign policy, and other relevant issues.  Last week the State Department held eight public meetings in the states through which the pipeline would run, plus this one today in Washington, D.C., in order to hear as many views as possible.  Thousands of Americans participated and those that didn't have the opportunity to speak can submit written comments that will become part of the official record, until October 9th at midnight.  We have also met with people representing divergent views, including NGO's, civil society organizations, other interest groups, Native Americans, and other interested parties.  On behalf of the Department of State, we would like to thank you for joining us at this public meeting. We recognize this is an important issue and we value your input.  As I said, the purpose of this meeting is to provide a venue for members of the public to express their views on whether issuing a Presidential Permit for the proposed Keystone XL pipeline is in the national interest. To focus time and attention on your comments, we will be listening to you today rather than answering questions.  We appreciate the interest of everybody in this room to take the time to share your perspective on this issue. We take your comments seriously and we will consider them carefully. Given the interest in this issue, it may not be possible for everyone in attendance to speak.  If you do not have the opportunity you can provide your written comments on the back of the sheet of paper that you got when you came in and you can leave those comments with us here at the back of the room.  There is a table right over there to collect your comments, or you can submit your written comments by mail, by fax, by email, or online. I reiterate, we need to have those comments by midnight on October 9th.  We understand that there are strong views and feelings about this issue. This meeting provides an opportunity for you to express your views, but we ask you to respect the rules that we have established so that we can hear from as many of you as possible. We ask that you are fair and respectful to everyone who has taken the time to come to this public meeting to present his or her views. Before we begin, we would like to describe the Department of State's role in the presidential permitting process and further to lay out the groundrules for this particular meeting.  
MS. COLEMAN: Good morning. In September 2008, TransCanada Keystone Pipeline, LP filed an application for a Presidential Permit for the proposed Keystone XL pipeline.  Executive Order 13337, signed on April 30, 2004, delegates to the Department of State the authority to issue a Presidential Permit for facilities such as the Keystone XL pipeline that cross the U.S. border.  In considering a permit, the Department of State determines whether the border crossing is in the U.S. national interest. Taking into account environmental and safety issues, as well as energy security, foreign policy, and social and economic matters. In addition to the Executive Order, the Department of State determined, because of the proposed pipeline's importance, that it would evaluate the pipeline's possible environmental and safety impacts consistent with the National Environmental Policy Act, or NEPA.  As a consequence, the State Department prepared an Environmental Impact Statement consistent with NEPA, to evaluate the proposed pipeline's potential environmental and safety impacts.  In preparing the Environmental Impact Statement, over the past 2-1/2 years we have conducted some 41 public meetings along the pipeline route and in Washington, D.C., to gather public comments and to develop the scope and draft of an EIS or impact statement.  On August 26, we released the Final Environmental Impact Statement, which addresses the more than 250,000 comments from the public comment period. The Final Environmental Impact Study is just one factor considered in the review process. It does not represent a final decision on the permit application.  Now, as we move into the national interest determination, the Department of State is compiling additional information if the proposed Keystone XL pipeline is in the U.S. national interest and to decide whether or not to grant the permit. This meeting is part of that effort.  
MR. STEELE: In order to maximize public participation and to be fair to all meeting participants, we ask that you abide by these rules of order. We hope to have the opportunity to listen to everyone who wishes to speak, but that may not happen. To make it a little bit more likely, we're going to have to allow, or give you a maximum amount of time of three minutes, so please limit your comments to three minutes. At the conclusion of that three minutes, you will see a sign that says "thank you." At that point in time, please do wrap up your comments so that we can hear from as many people as possible.  And again, certainly if you don't have time to finish your comments or if you cannot give your comments during the meeting, please do leave written comments at the table or this sheet of information that you got when you came in also provides the addresses by mail, online or email or fax for you to submit your comments.  We will consider all such comments whether we hear them orally or whether we get them in written form. Speakers will make their comments on a first come/first served basis by assigned number, having personally signed in personally at the door. After a speaker ends the next number and name will be called. And it's possible that we will call up to 4 speakers at a time just to kind of make it a little bit quicker. We can't really anticipate exactly how long each person is going to speak, so it's not possible for us to say, oh yes, you will be up in one hour. So you need to hear and you need to pay attention to where we are in the order.  When your number is called, we ask that you come to the microphone, that you state your name and affiliation and that you spell your last name also please for the court reporter and then offer your comments.  Again, as you speak, you will be timed for the three minute interval. A card will be displayed when you have one minute remaining and then again when your time is up. We do ask that you finish your comments in the allotted time. As I noted, all comments made here will be transcribed, will be recorded and transcribed by a court reporter and they will become part of our process of determining this.  Written comments again accepted until midnight on October 9th. Department of State officials are here to listen to your comments so that they can be considered. So this is not a question and answer or an information session.  We understand there are strong views on this issue and we ask that in fairness to everyone concerned, those who choose to speak, be allowed to do so without interruption. We request further that no displays or signs be posted in the room.  Please keep your remarks to three minutes and please be respectful of other speakers and I would ask also that you turn your cell phones off or put them to the silent setting.  Our plan is to conclude this meeting at 2:00 p.m. I wish to stress once again that the Department of State has not made a decision on this matter. This meeting is part of the process that will contribute to that.  We thank you for your interest. We thank you for coming to this meeting. One more reminder, the Fire Marshall has noted that it would be appreciated if people, rather than standing on the back, go ahead and find a seat and sit down -- remain seated if at all possible. I see most people are doing that, so thank you very much.  Again thank you for your interest, thank you for coming to this meeting, we'd like to start the proceedings with the first two speakers. I'll go ahead and call four speakers. #1, Sarah Hodgdon, #2 is Mara Collie, #3 is Ethan Muss, and #4 is Jennifer Hosterman. Please.  
MS. HODGDON: Good morning, my name is Sarah Hodgdon. I'm the Director of Conservation for the Sierra Club, the nation's largest environmental grassroots organization.  The Sierra Club and our 1.4 million members and supporters do not believe the Keystone XL tar sands pipeline is in the national interest.  Working with an incredibly diverse and broad coalition of groups across the United States and Canada, we've reviewed the final environmental assessment, conducted by the State Department. We've looked into TransCanada's record and we've listened to thousands of community member, farmers and ranchers from across the Midwest and Texas, all to come to the same conclusion time and time again, that the Keystone XL tar sands pipeline is a bad deal for America. The sole purpose of this pipeline is to deliver profits to a foreign oil company, TransCanada. Even Canadians have rejected this pipeline project, citing the massive environmental and public health risks it poses.  But TransCanada is asking U.S. ranchers, farmers, and landowners to shoulder the burden so that they can pump their dirty tar sands through the American heartland. It is simply not in our national interest to ask America landowners and business owners to forfeit their property to a foreign company while bearing the risks of toxic oil spills onto precious farmland and into the drinking water source for millions of Americans.  The opposition to Keystone XL is strong and continues to grow and for good reason.  TransCanada pipeline would create more toxic fumes and pollution, from the refining process of this heavy and highly corrosive oil and the risks of a pipeline burst or spill into drinking water sources and onto farmland are not a matter of if, but when.  The Americans who live along the proposed pipeline route understand what TransCanada's pipeline would do to their communities. And not surprisingly, they are vehemently opposed. We've heard Nebraska Senators consistently criticize the pipeline and the Republican Governor of Nebraska has asked the President to reject the permit outright.  Sierra Club members have sent hundreds of thousands of comments to the State Department, urging you to reject this permit for this dirty, dangerous and unnecessary pipeline. Dollar for dollar, investments in renewable energy jobs create more jobs in investments in fossil fuel infrastructure. Those are the types of investments that we should be making and promoting. We have the technologies today to start reducing our dependence on oil, deepening our dependence on the dirtiest source of oil on the planet is simply not in the national interest.  
MS. COLLIE: Hi, and thanks to the State Department for hosting this hearing. My name is Maura Cowley, I'm a Co-Director at Energy Action Coalition. We are at 200,000 young voters as our members, young people across this country who are vehemently in opposition to expansion of the Keystone XL pipeline and are asking President Obama to intervene and immediately revoke -- or deny the presidential permit. We represent 50 organizations all of whom work with young people in climate and energy issues and one in particular, the Indigenous Environmental Network whose young people every day are facing the horrific impacts of oil sands and oil drilling and building of this pipeline in their communities and they are sick and they are dying because of it.  We appreciate that you say that the State Department hasn't made a decision yet on this issue, but in fact, we don't believe you. E-mails detail a relationship between TransCanada and the State Department that in fact suggests that the two might be actually collaborating on lobby efforts and we think the Department of Justice needs to intervene immediately.    TransCanada has already broken the law in this process, their Lobbyist Paul Elliott is not currently registered to represent an international corporation, but in fact, that is what he is doing and once again we would like the Department of Justice to intervene and immediately investigate that.  TransCanada and the State Department are lying to the American public right now by claiming that this is a matter of energy independence, when in fact we know that Keystone XL is an export pipeline.  Valero, a key customer of the Keystone XL pipeline has already detailed an export strategy to its investors. This is other major stakeholders that will benefit from a profit perspective from this, include Royal Dutch Shell and the Saudi Arabian government. So this in fact, another project to pump the profits of the Middle East, and we should pretend that there is nothing else, so stop making claims that it is anything different and it will not help the American economy.  Fuel prices will spike in 15 states according to the Cornell University Global Labor Institute, because of this pipeline.  Beyond that, this is a moral issue for the State Department to consider. Right now, you are faced with a choice, will you stand up and work with the American people to protect our heartland from pollution, to ensure healthcare cost along the pipeline don't spike, to ensure that our future isn't compromise, or will you allow the cronyism that is apparently rampant in the State Department to continue by siding with big oil, siding with TransCanada and allowing the lies of TransCanada to be perpetuated?  Once again we are asking President Obama to intervene immediately and deny the pipeline.    
MR. NUSS: My name is Ethan Nuss with the Energy Action Coalition and every day I wake up and work for a vision in this country of 100% clean energy economy that will create jobs for my generation when my generation is facing the largest unemployment since the great depression.  Make this country a leader in clean energy technology that we can export across the world and create jobs here at home. I stood in line 14 hours to testify today and a month a go I sacrificed my civil liberties to participate in a peaceful setting in front of the White House and was arrested for those actions.  I did this because my future is at stake.  The future of my generation rests with the decision of today's State Department. This pipeline will be cut across indigenous lands and through my home state of Kansas, and I can't stand it. This is not within the national interest of the United States. One, because of the threat of global climate change. The world's leading climate scientist has said that if we tapped tar sands oil and burn it, it will be "game over" for the global climate.  When the U.S. Military itself talks about global climate change being the single greatest threat to our national security, even above that of terrorism? We simply cannot allow this to happen and have this threat. Second, because of the health impacts.  Last year alone, in the current Keystone pipeline 14 leaks have already happened? Because of the health impacts of my friends living in an indigenous communities and Mara said are getting sick and dying, I can't watch it happen any longer. And because we are being misinformed about the jobs. The Cornell Labor Institute did a recent study saying that the jobs we are promised will only come to a figure of about 3,000 because the current estimates do not calculate for factors such as the increase in gas prices that we know we will see, the risk of oil spills, and the detrimental health effects on our local communities.  And in fact, the only local jobs we will actually see from this pipeline will be between 500 and 700. Local communities will be bearing all of the environmental risks, all of the health risks, and getting none of the jobs.  What we have here is a foreign company using foreign materials to pump foreign oil through America's heartland when we can do better with a home grown vision of American energy, good union paying jobs in our steel mills making wind turbines across the Unites States and creating those millions of jobs for my generation that we need.    We can do it, we can make United States a global leader. We can end our addiction to oil. It starts here, it starts today and it starts with your decision by firmly coming out against and rejecting the Keystone Xl pipeline.    
MS. HOSTERMAN: Good morning and thank you. Good morning ladies and gentlemen. My name is Jennifer Hosterman. I am the Mayor of Pleasanton, California and I, along with fellow mayors John Dickert of Racine, Wisconsin and Frank Cownie of Des Moines, Iowa, have started gathering names and signing on mayors in support of saying no to this dirty pipeline.  Why do mayors care? Because we are on the ground and we're directly responsible for our constituents, for our citizens, for our Americans.  My day often starts with consoling a family whose son was killed in Afghanistan because of our reliance on foreign oil. My day then goes on to working with safety, fire, police, ensuring that health and safety of my community, all the while addressing pension reform in a real way without beating people up.  My day continues with making sure the trash gets picked up and the pot holes get filled.  And at the end of the day, at the grocery store on isle 6, I have people point their finger at me and say Mayor what are you doing about this problem? What are you doing about this? What are you going to do to protect our natural resources?  What are you going to do as director of the Bay Area Air Quality Management District to clean up our air in the Bay Area and in the state of California and this country?  What are you going to do as co-chair of the Mayor's Water Council for the United States Conference of Mayors to preserve our water, our drinking water, and the water that we use to grow our food?  That's my job and I will tell you that as of late last night, we have 50 mayors who had signed on to a letter, which we will be sending after we gather a few hundred more, which is not going to be too difficult over the coming couple of weeks, to ask the President of the United States to deny this permit.    Now we have a lot of people in this room who need work. We need to create jobs in this country and the way to create jobs is by passing the American Jobs Act.    We need to pour money into infrastructure improvements in this country so we can put people to work in good paying, long term jobs. That's my message, thank you.    
MR. STEELE: Thank you. I'd like to call please #5, Debra White Plume, #6, Thomas Meyer, #7, Betty Campbell, and #8, Ruth Kaplan, please. And you can use this other podium, if you wish, whichever one is closer to you, please.  
MS. WHITE PLUME: Good morning. My name is Debra White Plume, I am Ogallala Lakota from Pine Ridge Reservation, the Great Lakota Nation.  I am here today to tell President Obama the Great White Father and the Government of the United States of America that we do not want this pipeline in our 1868 Ft. Laramie Treaty Territory, the treaty that was ratified by the United States Congress, a legal, binding international document of law.  We have, under the United Nations the rights of the indigenous people which requires free prior informed consent before any mining or desecration of lands, air, water, people, can occur in our territory. We do not give free prior informed consent for TransCanada to bring this pipeline through our beloved Mother Earth in our area of this country.  This pipeline will cross our water pipeline on the Pine Ridge Reservation, Lower Brule Reservation, Rosebud Reservation. These are the only Lakota people on Mother Earth. We have no island where we can send for more Lakota people if our people are killed off by this oil contaminating our only drinking water source.  This pipeline will cross hundreds of surface water, river water. We believe that it is against Mother Earth, it is against our sacred water.  We cannot have this pipeline in our territory. We are human beings, the two legged, we live with the four legged, the winged, the standing silent nation, the plants, we are part of the environment. There are no lines separating human beings from the environment.  I stand here today to ask the Great White Father to say no to this pipeline, for him to defend our people, defend our water, defend our land, defend our animals and our birds and our plants.  Say no to this pipeline that is killing the people where the oil comes from of the First Nations in Canada. This is genocide for First Nation's people. The American people should not have to choose between jobs and wrecking the environment forever for our seven coming generations.  So I ask you all to remember the words Mitakuye Oyasin, it means all my relations. We are all related on Mother Earth. We all need to stand together for Mother Earth now because Mother Earth is crying. Our Lakota prophesy tells us, when Mother Earth cries, we stand up and we fight for her, she will die and we will die with her.  So I ask everyone to remember, crying earth rise up, rise up with Mother Earth, rise up and say no, no to this pipeline, no to death, no, no, no, no.    
MR. STEELE: Thomas Meyer please.  
MR. MEYER: My name is Thomas Meyer. I'm a Sophomore at American University here in Washington, DC. I have with me the signatures of 422 American University students, representing 43 states, the District of Columbia and the U.S. Virgin Islands.  They have signed the petition stating their opposition to the construction of the Keystone XL pipeline and their view that the pipeline is not in our national interest. The petition reads: We strongly oppose the construction of the Keystone XL pipeline and urge the Department of State and President Obama to deny TransCanada a presidential permit for this project.  As young people from all around the United States, we expect our leaders to stand up for a livable future. United States needs to start showing some real climate leadership by recognizing the facts of the tar sands and the Keystone XL pipeline.  Tar sands oil is far dirtier than other types of oil and the risks involved in transporting it across our country are outweighed only by the global consequences of burning it. Please say no to the tar sands and say no to the Keystone XL pipeline.  Thank you.    Good morning. Thank you for this opportunity. I realize I am in a minority here, but I support the Keystone XL pipeline.    
MS. CAMPBELL: I am from the Ft. Belknap Indian Reservation in North Central Montana where I was born, 76 years ago. My husband and I have been ranching since 1964. I still am an active cattle rancher, I raise long horn cattle and Angus and a few quarter horses.  I still do my own irrigating and I put up my own hay to winter my cattle. I was in education for 35 years. The first 20 years I taught on and off the reservation, the last 15 of those 35 years I was elementary school principal in the Hays/Lodge Pole public school on the reservation. Today I am, in addition to ranching, I am a director on the Big Flat Electric Cooperative Board where I served for 13 years, the majority of that time as Secretary/Treasurer of that Board.  My husband Bud was a Native American, a proud Native American. He enlisted in the army when he was barely 17 years old. Of course he wasn't my husband then, he did his basic training in the Philippines and he was there when WWII started.  After months of jungle fighting he was captured on the Bataan Peninsula on April 9, 1942 and he spent the next three and a half years in captivity in Japanese prison camps.  They were starved, beaten, worked as slave labor, they didn't know anyone even knew where they were if they were alive or dead, but Bud never lost his faith in America or his love for America.  This Keystone pipeline is a good project for America. This is the America that Bud fought for, believed in, and loved. The pipeline over its lifetime will provide billions of dollars in tax revenues to the states and counties along the pipeline corridor, which will help fund education, which is so important to our youth, our society, and our future. The large electric loads to power the pump stations on the pipeline, which served by Rural Electric Cooperatives, will help stabilize rates for all and that's particularly important on our Indian reservations where the poverty rate is so high.  I've spent most of my adult life on Indian reservations in Montana and I know that Native Americans were the original environmentalists. They respected the earth, they took only what they needed and wasted nothing.  This Keystone pipeline will be safe.  There are many safety features built into this one than the ones that are now in existence and operating with entire safety.  
MR. STEELE: Ms. Campbell, can you finish up please you've finished your three minutes.  
MS. CAMPBELL: Yes  
MR. STEELE: Thank you.  
MS. CAMPBELL: I support this because I have children, grandchildren and more than two dozen great grandchildren. I could not support anything that I thought would damage the environment and jeopardize their future.  I'm a rancher, and farmers and ranchers are the ultimate conservationists. Our life depends on the way we look after the land. I'm strong an independent woman. I value strength and independence.  
MR. STEELE: Thank you very much. For the record you are Betty Campbell?  
MS. CAMPBELL: Yes I am.    
MS. CAPLAN: I'm Ruth Caplan. I'm giving my place to Mike Klink to speak about the Keystone inspection process.  
MR. KLINK: Hello. Thanks for allowing me to speak. I'm the former inspector, I'm a civil engineer that worked on the --  
MR. STEELE: Can you state your name please for the record.  
MR. KLINK: Mike Klink.  
MR. STEELE: And do you have an affiliation?  
MR. KLINK: I am affiliated with myself.  
MR. STEELE: Okay.  
MR. KLINK: How's that? I decided to speak out because I wanted someone to know about the quality of the project that Keystone did on the first one in North and South Dakota.  Witness several glaring construction errors, poor concrete construction, reinforcing rod that was outside the structure, wrote all this up, sent it to the main contractor, sent it on to Bectel, who was the construction manager on the job, which went to TransCanada.  A lot of it was covered up, frozen concrete, there was several times that TransCanada came and viewed the work, said it's okay, it's in the middle of nowhere, don't worry about it, they covered it up and went on.  My integrity tells me that you can't do that. We can't allow things to be built that aren't according to the proper plans and specifications.  The pumping` station which had the largest leak is actually on an island in North Dakota surrounded by wetlands.  We watched the destruction of wetlands while they were doing construction. There is just no regard for them. We recorded them as environmental problems. TransCanada did nothing. They didn't care. Then we get to the piping, the piping had all come from China. What about the jobs that were lost in the United States, our steel mills? We need those jobs here. You go to weld onto the pipe and it splits and breaks.  Then they give us a report that says this pipe is good. Problem is, none of us could read Chinese. Please, if nothing else, before you decide on this, adopt quality standards. And I know that you may not have them right now, you think you don't, but the Nuclear Regulatory Committee does have them.  Give them a chance to build something that right, regulate it, welding procedures, and maybe, just maybe there won't be 14 leaks in the first year, one of the worse disasters of a pipeline in history.  Thank you very much.    
MR. STEELE: I'd like to call please #9, Ms. Anita Parlow, #10, Mr. Bob Vandervalt, #11, Steven Bruckner, and #12, Robin Mann, please.  
MS. PARLOW: Good Morning and thank you very much. My name is Anita Parlow. I am with A.L.  Parlow and Associates. You can find it at www.sustaintheglobe.com corporate social responsibility project. So thank you very much for allowing me to present briefly my thoughts regarding the administration's decision to approve or decline the permit that would allow for TransCanada to build the 1,700 miles tar sands pipeline, the Keystone XL that would traverse the American heartland, stretching from Alberta, Canada, before reaching Port Arthur on the Texas Gulf Coast.  I understand that the concerns right now are whether this would be in the national interest and I appreciate that you do national interest in a variety of complex ways.  Given that the proposed pipeline would cross amongst other locations, Indian country in the U.S., might I note that traditional Native American theology would ask that every significant decision regarding land or the utilization of natural resources, be made with consideration of potential impacts for seven generations yet to come.  The core issue is whether it is in the interest of the United States to approve the permit, the allow TransCanada to transport 830,000 barrels a day of Canadian tar sands.  My own perspective on whether the administration would grant a permit to TransCanada is based on two main concerns. First, that the decision be made within the context of energy security moving forward, and second, that if a favorable decision is made, the administration, along with TransCanada and other business interest, would fully incorporate conditionality into the permits to ensure an appropriate range of prevention, protection, and disaster response capabilities that would support the environment, water, humanity -- sorry, human and community risks.  My own experience in these matters draws from a combination of my advance degree in law from Oxford University and Corporate Social Responsibility and my recent work in the variety of locations in the Americas and subterranean Africa, Central Asia, and most recently on a BP related project in the U.S.  Gulf Coast, where community recovery, particularly in the seafood industry was at stake. The BP spill and its ongoing aftermath offers perhaps a sobering glimpse into what can happen if this is not done. The 1,700 mile pipeline could become a fault line moving into the 2012 election. But whatever the lead-up or outcome, the TransCanada should be treated on its own terms rather than as a political football.  My remarks focus on regulatory and other limitations that the administration should require before issuing a permit, should a permit be issued. And not to say that some of these issues weren't discussed in your EIS, but what we learned after the BP spill was that there was quite a lot left undone, unnoticed, unattended, or insufficient regulatory capabilities.  One energy security -- we were told that the pipeline is good for jobs. A gentleman waiting in line with us with one of the unions made it quite clear that 20% unemployment amongst workers, counts for something in terms of the determination of whether or not the permit would be issued.  However, a corollary question reads by several persons here is another question, another aspect of energy security of whether the tar sands oil will be used for domestic consumption or passed through for export.  
MS. STEEL: Ms. Parlow, can you go ahead and complete your remarks please.  
MS. PARLOW: I would just like to say in his new book, New York Times author Tom Freedman noted that the U.S. is becoming a country that transnational corporations hover over rather than identify with. The other issues that I think are quite significant would be leaks and spill issues, eminent domain and up-to-date disaster response capabilities which bring in local communities that might be affected or impacted by any disaster or spill or pipeline breakdown that might occur.  In conclusion however, before the administration should decide to grant a permit, the government must go beyond the call. It must consider all viewpoints and above all, develop a regulatory monitoring and disaster response capability that includes local communities to assure to the extent possible that a BP style disaster is not waiting in the wings. Thank you.  
MR. STEELE: Thank you.    
MR. VAN DERVALK: Thanks to Steve Jobs I have a timer that I can use, thank you Steve. My name is Bob van derValk. I travel the whole way here from Terry, Montana. I am a proud citizen. I have no stake in the Keystone XL pipeline. My wife and I traveled here 22 miles -- 2200 miles -- 22 miles I guess from here to the airport.  I am a petroleum industry analyst, I have been proud to be in the industry for 52 years, worked for UniCal for 20 of those years. I was there at the Santa Barbara oil spill and was the Santa Barbara oil spill plant manager and cleaned up my share of birds, and I was not proud of it. And I saw the malaise that caused us to have what at that point became the Iranian oil cut off and no energy policy.  And this Keystone XL pipeline will help us get at least get it back to the Americas, because we have lost in three wars and many conflicts 150,000 American lives fighting for foreign oil to get it here because the Exxon Mobiles and the other oil companies I have worked for cannot afford to follow all the regulations and anything that's been passed along to follow the rules that we need to have in order to have the clean environment that the American Indian/Native American just spoke about. Canada has been accused of manipulating oil prices and I am here to tell you that no one oil company can do that. We have the Goldman Sachs and the Morgan Stanleys and the hedge funds and the Wall Street banks for which these people outside are proudly protesting, doing it quite well thank you and they're making money.  We will, in fact save money on this pipeline because guess who is making all the money right now, transferring the oil from the Bakken North Dakota and Eastern Montana, Elm Coulee and Three Folk oil fields, the Burlington Northern and the Santa Fe, and do you know who owns that? Warren Buffet.  Is Warren Buffet going to make so much money he'll give up his 15 or 25 percent that he's been talking about to President Obama? I think he will. He's got a coal train going through Terry, Montana every 20 minutes from coal strip on the BNSF to Chicago. And you know what, I love it. It's industry, its capitalism, it's good. He is making money and it is good for him, but this pipeline will make money for us, it will be more economical.  And the last thing I wanted to say is, if my time is not up, I asked the question at the Glendale meeting, how many people here came in other than a fossil fuel vehicle. Got a few hands, okay in Glendale there was out of five owner, zero people that actually came in other than a fossil fuel vehicle. And my time is up and I appreciate it.  It's going to take a man of steel to get this word to President Obama to approve this pipeline now.    
MR. STEELE: I'd like to call Mr. Steven Bruckner please. Excuse me can you sit down please.  Also those in the back that are standing, there are plenty of seats in the front and the Fire Marshall would appreciate people remaining seated. Mr.  Bruckner.  
MR. BRUCKNER: Good morning. My name is Steven Bruckner. I'm with the Sierra Club. I'm Conservation Chair of the Virginia Chapter. I speak today in opposition to the proposed Keystone XL pipeline not only because it violates the official climate positions of both the Canadian and U.S. Governments, but because the Canadian oil industry's proposal is against the economic interest of Americans, specifically its farmers and consumers.  The oil economist, Professor Verleger from the University of Calgary states that building the Keystone XL pipeline would increase the full fuel cost of U.S. farmers by $2.6 billion in 2013.  It would increase the fuel cost throughout the U.S. because farmer's fuel costs are passed through to consumers. It would increase the gasoline and diesel throughout the Midwest by 10 to 20 cents per gallon.  Therefore, the building of Keystone XL would increase America's oil bill by $5 billion per year. How would this happen? At the current time, the Canadian tar sands oil is shipped to refineries in Illinois and Oklahoma.  These refiners pay $15 per barrel less than the global price because the tar sands oil is in over supply. This reduced price benefits Midwest farmers and consumers. If the Keystone XL pipeline is built, the oil will be shipped to refineries in the Gulf Coast and from there the resulting gasoline and diesel will be exported to Europe and South America where it will fetch the $15 per barrel higher global price.  Since the Canadian oil companies will be able to receive the higher price by exporting they will reduce the supply into the U.S. market until the U.S. price increases to match the global price, thus the Keystone XL pipeline, if built, will decrease supply to the U.S. market and will increase the U.S.  oil bill by $5 billion per year.  In addition, the Canadian oil companies claim the proposed Keystone XL pipeline will reduce dependence on imported oil from unfriendly countries and reduce the potential for supply disruptions.  This claim is bogus, however, because the U.S. already has 700 million barrels --    
MR. STEELE: Can you please let the gentleman speak. Thank you, his time is not up yet.  Go ahead Mr. Bruckner.  
MR. BRUCKNER: The U.S. already has a 700 million barrel strategic petroleum reserve designed to provide the same protection. This reserve provides more than adequate insurance against supply disruptions. In summary, the proposed Keystone XL pipeline is against the economic interest of U.S.  farmers and consumers and should not be approved. Consider the uproar over the failure of the Department of Energy's loan guarantee to Solandra, that cost U.S. taxpayers $500 million. This Department of State decision would cost taxpayer $5 billion per year, that is 10 Solandras per year, every year. Thank you.    
MR. STEELE: Robin Mann please.  
MS. MANN: Hi, Robin Mann. Thank you for the opportunity to testify today regarding the Keystone XL pipeline. As President of the Sierra Club, the country's oldest and largest grassroots environmental organization, I'm here on behalf of our more than 1.4 million members and supporters to say that the Keystone XL pipeline is not in our nation's interest.  This pipeline is dangerous, dirty, and unnecessary. I was in Montana this summer just after the Yellowstone River oil spill. I toured the site of the spill and what I saw was a catastrophe. Oil pasturing crop lands, 25 miles of river fouled by 42,000 gallons of toxic crude oil.  I took away three lessons that the Department should heed in the decision on this pipeline. First, spills happen no matter how many precautions are taken. Second, impacts are much more devastating during extreme weather events such as flooding, droughts and wildfires as we're seeing in Texas, and changing climate appears to be bringing more extreme weather. And third, out of sight is not out of the ecosystem or unconnected to our health.  I saw a pasture where the top of the grass looked fine and on their stems below was residual oil, oil that was left there from the flooding conditions, oil that will poison the land, poison the water, poison the livestock for a very long time.  Last week we saw hundreds of Americans travel to hearings to say no to this pipeline. These people were not paid, not bused around by TransCanada.    These were people who took off work, took the time to understand this complicated project, who are exposing the truth behind TransCanada's exaggerated claims, uncovering the dismal safety record of this company.  The American people expected a fair hearing by the Department of State and were shocked to see their testimony being taken by employees of a company called Cardno Entrix, a friend that advertises specialization in permitting and compliance and whose clients include TransCanada and  
BP.  I am glad to know my comments are being heard today by the State Department officials. This firm has managed much of the environmental impact review, public outreach and public comment process, State Department has failed to deliver on its responsibility to draft a scientifically robust and fair environmental review.  The State Department has also grossly mismanaged the public input process by turning it over to a firm aligned with the oil company proposing this pipeline.  Americans are not being asked to shoulder these risks from the Keystone XL pipeline simply to grant the tar sands industry access to an international shipping port.  There is no guarantee that this pipeline's oil will be used in the United States and, in fact, one of the main companies contracted to purchase the oil has indicated it will export it.  It is simply not in our national interest to threaten the air, water, and land of millions of Americans to supply foreign markets with this dirty oil and benefit the companies serving them. Sierra Club calls on the Department of State to take another look at this proposed pipeline, and this time, do it without the TransCanada contractors and TransCanada lobbyists in the room.  This time take an honest look at the impacts, look at the science, look at the record, and listen to the will of the American people. The national interest will be clear. Say no to the pipeline.    
MR. STEELE: Ladies and gentlemen, while we appreciate that you appreciate the comments made by the various different speakers; long rounds of applause do take time away from listening to those comments. So please hold that down. I'd next like to call Ms. Daniel Simms, #13, Mr. Eric Pica, please #14, #15, Susan Straka Luebbe, and #16, George Poitras, please.  
MS. SIMMS: Hi my name is Daniel Simms. I was born in 1988, the same year that NASA scientist James Hansen gave his testimony on climate change and brought the issue to broader awareness.  I was too young to remember the Exxon Valdez oil spill in Alaska, too young in 1997 to understand the frustration when the United States didn't sign the Kyoto Protocol.  Throughout my life, I've seen the effects of droughts to some of the largest most destructive hurricanes in history and I've lived through the hottest years on the planet and I graduated college weeks after the BP oil spill disaster.  Clearly the United States needs to lead I this action. I am African American and many of our communities pay the price by living near health risks such as coal-fired power plants or oil pipelines.  This Keystone XL pipeline isn't just an environmental issue but a justice and civil rights issue as well. It could destroy aquifers, and introduce toxins to our food supply.  Already, tar sands oil extraction requires removing ancient forests and leave toxins behind that cause cancer and increase air pollution and lung disease.  I have Native American ancestors, indigenous people who have perfected how to coexist with nature, will see their communities destroyed by this pipeline. Indigenous people have contributed little to climate change yet they suffer from the brunt of their direct and immediate effects.  The proposal for this audacious pipeline shows that the State Department is willing to put the wellbeing of communities at risk for the profit of the oil industry. The American people sense deep in their bones that with just a slight change of priorities, the federal government can make every effort to end Apartheid and start decreasing the income gap between the haves and have nots, and to start leading on climate action. This begins when our country ceases to invest in an unjust energy system that creates expendable people in order to benefit millionaires. This begins when the U.S. stops investing its technology that poisons our planet, our water supply and food supply.  This begins when t he U.S. shows the world that we have a determination and a vision to end our addiction to oil while reducing our contribution to climate change.  Since the Keystone XL pipeline has already leaked 12 times in 12 months, a new pipeline is not a serious effort to solve this problem. In 2006, one Senator stated, since as America is addicted to oil without following a real plan for energy independence, it's like admitting alcoholism and then skipping out on the 12-step program. It's not enough to identify the challenge, we have to meet it. That Senator is now our President. State Department, today, if you feel the sense of urgency we feel, then you have no doubt the moral choice you must make. Either you will support the oligarchy and the oil industry or you will stand up for the American people and for environmental and civil rights justice.  We are empowering you, the State Department to deny the pipeline for the Keystone XL.  Thank you.    
MR. PICA: Good morning. My name is Eric Pica and I am President of Friends to the Earth United States. I am here representing our members, who are up and down the pipeline route. I am here representing the more than 76 Friends of the Earth country groups around the world because this pipeline is a dangerous, deadly, polluting pipeline that will, as Jim Hansen says, take our planet into climate chaos. We have not been silent about our opposition to this pipeline, but we want to live within the NEPA process, the fact that citizens have a fair right to express their opinion, but unfortunately, Secretary Clinton and the State Department very early on tipped the scales in TransCanada's favor.  In October, Secretary Clinton said she was inclined to approve this pipeline. She was inclined to approve it before comments here today and around the country were heard. That is an imbalanced process.  It's also shocking to see that Cardno Entrix, a consultant for TransCanada, a business partner for TransCanada is leading this process.  That is tipping the scales.  Just last week, Friends of the Earth got over 300 pages of FOIA information from State Department officials that were coaching, that were rooting for TransCanada and the lobbyists that they hired, mainly Paul Elliott, to get this pipeline approved.  And finally, this week we have filed a lawsuit in Nebraska because the State Department is allowing illegal clearing and moving of endangered species before this process is complete. This is an unbalanced, unfair process.  You've asked the public for questions and now I have a few questions for State Department. Are these hearings simply a farce? Are they a parody of the governing process and a parity of the rule of law? Why are you asking input right now when it's very clear from FOIA documents that I will submit for the record, so that the future generations, if this pipeline is approved, can read how the State Department helped this pipeline get built. Are you just clearing the way and making excuses for TransCanada?  And finally, why is the State Department allowing this illegal clearing in Nebraska and the moving of endangered species before a permit, before a permit is even approved and the process for public hearing is done?  President Obama ran a campaign on trying to clean up Washington, DC in cleaning up the lobby process. It is clear that this process is failing as promised, it is failing the American people and it is failing the environment, and it is failing our need globally to address climate change.  This pipeline should and must be stopped.  President Obama must take the authority from the State Department and make the decision on his own because that is the only way that we protect this planet, protect the American people and ensure that there is integrity in this process, which is lacking right now. Thank you.    
MR. STEELE: Please, do go ahead.  
MS. STRAKALUBY: Hello, my name is Susan Strakaluby. I am a landowner and a rancher from the Sand Hills of Nebraska.  First of all I'd like to shout out to mom and all the people back home helping me out while I'm here for our county.  I have traveled all the way here to tell all of you this permit must be denied. It is not in the national best interest for anyone except the money hungry, greedy corporation of TransCanada.  I am part of a fourth generation ranch that raises Black Angus cow. Sadly our way of making a living could all go away in seconds and that is why we have not signed our easement contract with TransCanada land agents.  People out here have no idea what it takes to work in the land of the sand hills of Nebraska.  It is a seven-day per week job. We are proud of what we do but not everyone can do the work we do.  You have to grow up in this type of atmosphere to stick it out day after day. So when a foreign corporation comes in and tells us landowners lie after lie to get us to sign, it leaves a very sour taste in our mouth.  All of us Nebraskans are now very concerned about our sand hills and our water. You see, if I don't take care of both, it could leave the land destitute for anyone to live off of it forever. I don't want tar sands chemicals in our water. Our water table on our ranch is only two feet underground. Knowing this pipeline will sit in, not over the aquifers, is a serious threat to our livelihood of Nebraska.  We have been threatened with eminent domain so many times. The bad reputation and intense false promises of TransCanada does not make anyone trust them. All the jobs promised is not worth the economic stimulus that Nebraska sand hills and our aquifers will stand.  We are an Ag state with the world's best kept secret, until now, and now it is an all out war to battle TransCanada and keep them off our property.  If I can't sell my cattle, if I can't sell my land, if I can't shower or drink the greatest tasting water on earth, when there is a leak in our aquifers, where will I work? President Obama, you promised to let the earth heal and look for better ways to lead our future. Madam Secretary of State Clinton, this is definitely in our nation's worse interest.  Please, for our children's future on our ranch, deny this permit. Thank you.    
MR. STEELE: George Poitras please.  
MR. PACHA: Good morning, my name is George Pacha. I think I am the one who is out of the ordinary here because I am First Nation and I come from Northern Canada. I actually come from the tar sands area. I represent many First Nations in Canada and I'm here today representing the families who are also living and dying with very rare and aggressive cancers which we suspect are caused from the tar sands.  I'm a former Chief of my First Nation. We live in an area called the Peace-Athabasca Delta, which is one of the largest fresh water deltas in the world. Unfortunately, the tar sands are situated in our traditional homelands and we've been observing many issues of the 40 years of open pit mining of the tar sands and only three percent of the total tar sands deposit has been mined.  We've seen water quality issues, water quantity issues, impacts to animals, to birds, to big game, to fish health and more critically, we're seeing rare and aggressive cancers in my community today.  We've seen environmental injustices, human rights abuses, repeated infringements of our constitutionally treaty rights by both Alberta and Canada and by third parties like the multi-national oil companies that are invested in the tar sands.  There is nothing ethical about using tar sands oil versus Saudi Arabia oil. Your thirst for tar sands and for this pipeline will undoubtedly mean the total devastation of our homelands, the water, the animals, the birds, the fish, and contribution to early deaths of my people and undoubtedly the genocide of my people. We vehemently and categorically reject the approval of this pipeline for very obvious reasons and I want to challenge Secretary Clinton, President Obama who I think has an ethical and moral obligation prior to making this determination of an approval to visit the tar sands, to see the tar sands, to hear our people, and to listen to the many concerns and issues that people have.  And so with that I am happy to be here with our indigenous brothers and sisters from both sides of the border to oppose this pipeline. Thank you.    
MR. STEELE: I'd like to call please Mr.  Steven Anderson, Mr. George Stanley, Mr. Randy Thompson and Mr. Leslie Fields, please.  
MR. ANDERSON: Good morning. I am Steve Anderson, Retired Brigadier General of the United States Army. I was a Senior Logistician in Iraq for 15 months, directly working for General David Petraeus.  I want to tell you why I believe that this pipeline is against our national best interest and why it's against our Military's best interest.    This pipeline will keep us addicted to oil and our addiction to oil gets soldiers killed. We have lost over 1,000 American lives moving fuel on the battlefield in Iraq and Afghanistan, and I know because I was the guy that was running many of those convoys, controlling that from the top.  It wastes billions of dollars. This nation will spend $20 billion this year alone on the fuel and the energy to air condition structures in Iraq and Afghanistan. That's just for air conditioning, $20 billion in consideration of the fully burden cost of fuel, which is $30.00 per gallon in Afghanistan and probably $18.00 or so per gallon in Iraq.  We're talking about the most isolated nation in the world and it's hard to get fuel up there folks. This pipeline will continue to fund our enemies and our enemies are delighting in this pipeline because they know that their wealth will continue to prosper and ours will degrade.  We will continue to send billions of dollars over to our enemies that are right now building bombs and trying to kill us, and our soldiers are dying because of it.  Over 3,500 American lives have been lost to the IEDs that were funded by our oil money. This pipeline will take off the pressure to develop renewable energy and we've heard about that more compellingly already than I can speak. Well we need to continue that energy development and that will get jobs by the way, in a green economy for veterans like me. This will continue, CO2 emissions and CO2 emissions lead to climate change and climate change leads to instability and that will mean that soldiers like me will have to continue to fight and die in order to police the world. This pipeline will set back the clock 25 years of energy development in this nation, it will delight our enemies. It comes down to a couple things folks, CO2 emissions, clean water, and American blood. Stop this pipeline!!    
MR. STEELE: George Stanley, please.  
MR. STANLEY: Good morning. My American brothers and sisters my name is George Stanley. I represent Alberta Region of four to five First Nation committees. I come from an assembly of First Nations as an efficacy body.  I bring to you some key notes to you folks and I'm sure that it's all to do with human, a healthy environment and our species at risk. But foremost, I want to bring a strong message from four to five nations that I represent.  We, back in 1971, we had a Premier called Peter Lougheed, that made very clear to Albertans, when he initiated the open pit mining, that it was meant for Alberta. He never envisioned Keystone, Ambrit, and so on. Today, is very concerned as well as leaders like myself. We bring forward to our Canadian counterparts who send strong messages that we want some communication, consultation to our First Nations that are most impacted.  Today you can see tar sands from outer space, that's how we're used to this and I come from that very, very back of that oil tar sands. I don't expect to live more than 15 years. If someone can come and pay my bill and the bills that are forward to the next generation to the cost of this tar sands, I'm welcoming them to come and pay for that because the Alberta people are not paid on these health issues.  I'm very adamant in many ways about tar sands because as First Nations we invest of some of those and sad to say that there is no policy or any regulations from the province, let alone for province, but federal government.  I want to greet all of my brothers and sisters that are wearing red and orange shirts, come and visit us in Alberta. You will be about six hours before you get to the tar sands, you will smell this and living there is another thing. I want to bring this message before you, Obama, my brother I should say, somebody say he is a Chief, like myself, let's consider a dialogue before I agree to support this and brothers, the farmers, their belts are getting higher, so they're making some comments.  American farmers, some that agree, some that disagree, we will not bring you the dirty oil if you don't want us to. Thank you and good morning.    
MR. STEELE: I'd like to call please, Randy Thompson, then Leslie -- Randy Thompson, yes you're next.  
MR. THOMPSON: Good morning. My name is Randy Thompson. I am from Martell, Nebraska. I'm here as a Nebraska citizen and landowner. I would like to thank you for the opportunity to be here today. I'm very proud to be a Nebraskan.  Nebraska is a great place to live and it's filled with many hard working, honest, good people. Normally, you'll never hear a Nebraskan raising much of a fuss unless an official makes a poor call at Husker football game.  But in recent months I have noticed a change in the behavior of my fellow Nebraskan, like booing a corporate sponsor at a Husker football game.  They were booed so severely that the athletic director elected to remove the ads from the stadium.  The corporate sponsor was TransCanada.  I have also witnessed something I have never seen before and that's my fellow Nebraskans filling the hearing halls to make their voices heard. This might bring you to ask the question, what's got you folks so stirred up out there on the Plaines?  Well the short answer is, we feel like we're being thrown under the bus, not for a project that's in our national interest, but very much for a project that is in the private interest of big oil companies.  We feel our legitimate concerns about the sand hills and our great Ogallala Aquifer have gone unrecognized in an environmental statement that was in part written by consulting firms with very close ties to big oil companies.  We know the value of water to our state and to this great nation. We realize that water, not oil, is the central ingredient for life.    We also understand that water will become a critical issue for future generations of Americans and we can ill-afford to waste or contaminate one drop of that water, especially not for the sake of greed.  We have difficulty rationalizing how a pipeline pushing oil across our country to some unknown destination can be in our national interest.  In closing, I would like to say this, history will be the ultimate judge of this project and we're about ready to write that chapter of our history. Will our descendants look back and say, thank God our great grandfathers had the foresight to protect the resources that we are now depending upon or will they say, what were the damn fools thinking about?    
MR. STEELE: I would like to call please Leslie Fields, Lisa Van Susteren, Mike Richter and Leslie Weeks, please.  
MS. FIELDS: Good morning, my name is Leslie Fields. I'm the Environmental Justice and Community Partnership Director for the Sierra Club and we appreciate very much this opportunity to testify in this important issue.  I'm just here to simply state that this pipeline, as many of my colleagues and our friends from all over this hemisphere have said, is not in the national interest. Not only that, the analysis for this pipeline is terribly flawed and the State Department failed to conduct an environmental justice analysis of this EIS and understand that President Clinton was resolute in his Executive Order 1289 and which still serves as the guiding principle on which a federal agency should conduct their actions to further environmental justice. In the accompanying memorandum to the heads of the federal agencies, he emphasized that a part of every NEPA analysis, federal agencies must analyze the environmental effects, including human health, economic and social effects, and including effects on minority populations and low income populations.  Echoing this Executive Order, the Council on Environmental Quality guidance also states plainly that the NEPA process must include an analysis of the relevant public health data, as well as an analysis of the cumulative multiple exposures. This guidance also requires the State Department to consider cultural, social, historical and economical factors that may be acerbated by this pipeline. This was not done. We are very much appreciative of Cynthia Geils, the Assistant Administrator for the office of Enforcement, Compliance Insurance of the EPA and their analysis saying that there was not enough evidence that this influx of huge amount of oil into these refineries in the Gulf Coast will have no environmental impact. In fact, it is most likely to add another strew of pollution to communities already burdened by multiple sources of pollution. There has been a systematic failure of the State Department throughout this process to give adequate consideration to the impacts and risks of this project that poses to minority populations and to meaningfully include these populations in this review.  But finally I estimate severely flawed in its conclusion that this project will have no environmental ramifications and it also fails to provide sufficient mitigation measures to remedy spills or ruptures, it fails to identify the most likely refineries that will process the Keystone XL pipeline, it fails to analyze the health impacts of the surrounding communities and avoids an analysis of refining impacts by claiming that this pipeline will not change the current levels of heavy crude refinery. The EIS seems to ignore that pipelines do spill and often much m ore predicted by their owners as we have heard today. In fact, the TransCanada predicted that its Keystone pipeline would only spill once in its first year of operation and it has spilled 12 times. That has resulted in the Pipeline Hazardous Materials and Safety Administration issuing a corrective order to TransCanada, finding that the continued operation of the pipeline without corrective measures will be hazardous to live, property, and the environment. Despite this, the State Department claims that the proposed project would not likely pose significant risk to residents along the route associated with spills and leaks due to stringent safety integrity measures incorporated.  EPA also strongly criticized the EIS analysis of the impacts refining the crude because it is not evident that 830 million barrels a day of capacity from Canada to the refineries will have no omissions of fact.  
MR. STEELE: Ms. Fields could you go ahead and wrap up your comments.  
MS. FIELDS: Okay.  
MR. STEELE: Thank you.  
MS. FIELDS: Well the refineries in the communities in Port Arthur, Texas, include Matevo, Valero, Huntsman Petroleum, Chevron Philips, Great Lakes Carbon, Total Pheona, BSFF Pheona, and also Chemical Waste Management facility.  We are very disappointed that Secretary Clinton has already made almost a determination for this pipeline and propose to approve it. We remember when she was Senator Clinton she instituted and held the first ever environmental justice hearing in USA history in July of 2007. We were very encouraged back then. We believe that she should heed what her spouse when he was president in his environmental justice executive order to make sure that these impacts, these communities are protected and we very much hope that this current president will veto this pipeline. Thank you.  
MR. STEELE: Thank you.    
MS. VAN SUSTEREN: Lisa Van Susteren. I am a doctor. I am on the Advisory Board of the Center for Health and the Global Environment at the Harvard Medical School.  One month ago I was arrested at the White House in protest of the Keystone XL pipeline. I am speaking about our health and what we stand to lose.  50 square miles of lake size bodies of toxic waste water have been formed from oil sands operations.  These dirty waters are spilling into our watershed. Fort Chipewyan is one downstream cancer hot spot. Our brothers and sisters there are three times more likely to be stricken with leukemias and lymphomas.  Lung cancers are on the rise and rare cancers. Carcomias, extremely lethal cancers of the soft tissues, bile duct cancers, Cholangiocarcinomas, seven times more frequently diagnosed.  Two, just two of the substances in these toxic wastewaters, the potent carcinogen benzene linked especially to leukemias and lymphomas. The Canadian government acknowledges that developing the tar sands in 2007 alone caused 40,000 pounds of benzene to be dumped into the Athabasca River.  Arsenic, once released into the environment cannot be recaptured. It damages the health of humans and animals at great distances from where it was initially dumped, causes infertility, neurologic damage, liver damage, cancers of the lungs, bladder, kidneys, liver, also linked to lymphoma.  Fourteen months ago the Keystone pipeline spilled a million gallons of tar sands into the Kalamazoo River. The acute phase, vomiting, seizures, skin rashes, memory loss, what will happen long term? And then there is what happens to us when we breathe bad air, which will worsen with tar sands that produce even more carbon dioxide than convention fossil fuels.  I am a psychiatrist. I pierce denial for a living. Think about it. Where will we be safe?  How will we feel? The rest of the world will know how much of the carbon budget we took for ourselves and the destruction that this has caused. We will be pariahs.  To the State Department, Secretary Clinton, deny this permit.    
MR. RICHTER: Well, my name is Mike Richter, I'm a three time U.S. Olympian and currently here as a clean tech entrepreneur. As a life-long athlete, I understand well the connection between my health and my ability to perform at high levels and reach my potential. As a father of three young boys, a husband and a son to an elderly parent, I also understand the intimate connection that each of us has between our level of health and the quality of life and the environment in which we live.  There are in fact few things more fundamental in their importance than our health. If we are going to fulfill our potential as people, as a nation, and even as a species, there can be no higher priority than to take every measure possible to ensure that the health of our air, water, natural resources in which life depends, is taken care of.  The question of the development of the tar sands and the construction of the XL pipeline offer such an opportunity. I want to stress two points here. First, the tar sands are an environmental disaster on many levels. Secondly, the environment is never just about the environment.  The greenhouse gas emissions for tar sands are estimated at three times that of conventional oil. Whatever the level, given the best science that we know, any increase should be avoided and these levels are simply reckless. Tar sands crude contains more heavy metals, more carcinogens than conventional oil. They have on average 11 times more sulfur, 11 times more nickel, 6 times more nitrogen, 5 times lead than conventional oil. Simply put, we'll suffer more respiratory diseases and more cancer.  The pipeline as you heard will cross directly through five states in our nation's Heartland threatening sensitive land and rivers, roads, the Ogallala Aquifer, which is 30% of our agricultural water and drinking water for 2 million Americans.  Tar sands carry more corrosive material and must be transported at higher temperatures and high pressure. The likelihood of catastrophic spills along 1,700 miles is just unacceptably high.  Ironically, the economic and national security are two reasons proponents use to support the tar sands. This is a mistake. First, increasing the concentration you heard of greenhouse gases destabilizes the climate, compromises food security, increases extreme weather events, environmental refugees and undermines global security.  Treating geostrategic threat for an ecological risk is just shortsighted. If we learned one thing when Deep Water Horizon exploded, it's that with one environmental catastrophe the economy and social fabric of an entire region can be destroyed as effectively as a terrorist attack.  Most importantly, Keystone XL will deepen our dependence on oil at precisely a time when we need to be investing in alternative energy infrastructure. By supporting yesterday's fuel source we are moving dangerously close to ceding our leadership position in the global clean tech economy. Ultimately, the idea that our national security depends on putting our environment at risk and sacrificing our long-term interest for the profits of a private foreign company, is a false choice. With efficiency and conservation, we can save 4 million barrels of oil per day by 2020, 10 million per day by 2030. That's more than we import from the Middle East, Venezuela and the tar sands expansion combined. With a real effort at home grown clean energy industry, the United States have the potential to reignite its economy, create lasting jobs, significantly bolster national security and the health of its people.  We will only realize this potential if our leaders realize theirs and stop the tar sands. Thank you.    
MS. COLEMAN: Thank you. I'd like to call now Leslie Weeks, #24 Danny Ruthenberg-Marshall, #25 Larry Schweiger, and #26 Rachel Eggebo and to remind you if you could spell your last name and give your affiliation, thank you.  
MS. WEEKS: I am Leslie Weeks. I am turning my time over to Dean Hubbard:  
MR. HUBBARD: My name is Dean Hubbard and I'm a proud member of the Transport Worker's Unison of America. We represent some 200,000 active members and retirees nationwide. Our members work in airlines, public transit, on rails, gaming, utilities and universities. We respectfully call on the State Department not to recommend approval of a presidential permit for construction of the Keystone XL pipeline.    Construction of the pipeline is not in the national interest of the United States. We share the concerns conveyed by the EPA to the State Department on two occasions, most recently on June 6th. These concerns as you know, include first, the potential impacts to United States ground water resources from pipeline spills, second, the high level of greenhouse gas emissions associated with the proposed project, which will just make worse the job-killing component of the climate crisis. And third, the inevitable damage to the health of communities in the United States affected by the increase in refinery emissions. Approval of this project would, in our view, be reckless, given the EPA's assessment of the environmental risks.  More importantly, from a union perspective, approval of this project would impede our country's critical efforts to create the jobs that we need to transition to a more sustainable economy. This is a transition that science tells us we must make immediately in order to prevent irreversible harm to the climate.  To help us make that transition, there is no shortage of water and sewage pipelines that need to be fixed or replaced, bridges and tunnels that are in need of emergency repairs, and transportation infrastructure that needs to be renewed and developed. There are jobs that need to be created in the energy conservation, in upgrading the grid, maintaining and expanding public transportation, jobs that can help us reduce air pollution, green house gas emissions, and improve energy efficiency.  It's past time for major new deal type public investments in infrastructure modernization and repair, energy conservation and climate protection as a means of putting people to work and laying the foundation for a more sustainable economic future for the United States.    This is just sound science and sound economics. Increasing our reliance on bitumen sands oil would take us in the opposite direction. Thank you.    
MS. COLEMAN: Thank you. Yes, please.  
MR. RUTHENBERG-MARSHALL: My name is Danny Ruthenberg-Marshall. I'm a member of the Maryland Student Climate Coalition and an organic farm worker from Southern Maryland.  When I look at DC, I see the frontlines of politics, of a political system where money buys power and the people are ignored. A system where our so-called public servants bow to corporations, a system where the long-term wellbeing of the public trust is ignored in favor of the short-term profits of the already wealthy.  It is a flawed system that we cannot fix immediately, but we can take a step in the right direction. You have an opportunity to break the cycle and say not to corporate interest. You can say that our environment is more important than corporate profit and we will not sacrifice it. You can give the country back to the people who love it dearly.  Say no to corporate greed and yes to public need. Say no to the Keystone XL pipeline and yes to true energy independence. Say yes to a clean energy future based on renewable, built in this country by American labor. Creating temporary jobs and shipping energy abroad is not conducive to building a productive America nor is it conducive to energy security and independence.  Break the political cycle, break the collusion between corporate interest and government decision-makers and build a better and brighter American future.    
MS. COLEMAN: Thank you very much.  
MR. SCHWEIGER: I am Larry Schweiger and I am President and CEO of the National Wildlife Federation. The Federation is a non-partisan, non- profit organization supported by 47 state affiliates and 4 million members across America.  The Keystone XL pipeline is a dangerous and unnecessary project that jeopardizes America's conservation heritage, the livelihood of landowners across its path and the precious resources upon which many in this country depend and a presidential permit should not be granted.  The question being asked is whether this pipeline is in the national interest. The answer is pretty simple. For me as a father and a grandfather spoiling our planet for our children's future is not in the national interest. Addicting Americans to trillions of dollars of expensive Canadian oil is not in the national interest. Leaving our kids with a superheated planet with super-sized oil spills is not in our national interest. I wonder what national interest means to the administration. Our measuring stick is very clear, what we should be doing is for our kids and our grandchildren, the natural world that we leave them. I am troubled by what the State Department seems to be using as its measuring stick. The e-mail traffic that has been uncovered makes clear the cozy relationship with the corporations pushing this project and Secretary Clinton passed judgment long ago that this pipeline is a good thing for America without ever talking to the landowners who are affected by this project, without ever talking to the First Nation people, without talking to the experts who know that this is a dangerous pipeline and a terrible idea.  It says a lot that she is not here today.  I don't think she has ever sat down with the opponents of this pipeline but she is meeting today with corporate leaders, including the corporation that is encouraging investments in this tar sands pipeline.  Keystone XL is a critically important and environmental legacy decision for the Obama Administration. The State Department's final Environmental Impact Statement for the Keystone XL concluded it would increase America's carbon pollution output equivalent to adding 4 million new cars to our roads.  President Obama should stay the course and be remembered as the clean car president, not change gears and become the dirty fuels president.  President Obama needs to step in on this and make a decision based on the evidence and not allow this decision to be made by the Secretary of State or anyone at the State Department who has obvious conflicts of interest. It's the right thing to do for wildlife, it's the right thing to do for families along the pipeline route, and it's most especially it's the right thing to do for our children's future.  I personally witnessed tar sands impacts in Canada; saw the unclaimed mining sites that have been talked about here, the polluted rivers, the destruction of Boreal Forest water contamination and air contamination for the First Nations people and more importantly for their future. Keystone XL --  
MS. COLEMAN: Sir, I regret to say I'm almost out of time here sir.  
MR. SCHWIGER: Let me conclude by simply saying that this is an important decision for not just America's future but the future of this world and President Obama needs to show leadership on this urgent issue. Thank you.    
MS. COLEMAN: Thank you.  
MS. EGGEBO: I am Rachel Eggebo from Grand Electric Cooperative in Bison, South Dakota and I am here today to voice my support for the Keystone XL pipeline.  I, along with the General Manager and Board of Directors of Grand Electric believe that the pipeline will enhance the development of our natural resources in our area and ensure the development of U.S. resources.  We believe purchasing oil through TransCanada from a friendly neighboring nation is far better than to continue to purchase oil from unstable, unfriendly Middle East countries.  I agree that all safety issues need to be addressed and protocols need to be implemented.  However, I also believe that the federal and state agencies have done their job and will place adequate restriction requirements on TransCanada to assure that the pipeline does not pose unreasonable risk or exposure. What does the pipeline do for domestic energy production? In January 2011, TransCanada closed a successful open season which resulted in a long-term commitment of 65,000 barrel of oil per day that will be moved into this pipeline at an on ramp that will be built near Baker, Montana.  Those 65,000 barrels of oil will be pumped from Bakken Formation within the Wilerston Basin in North Dakota. In the September 22nd edition of the Oil Pitch Hotline, which is an online newsletter that reports on the oil activity in the North Central United States, North Dakota governor, Jack Dalrymple stated that within the next two years North Dakota could be producing as much as 700 barrels of oil per day.  If North Dakota does indeed product 700 barrels -- 700,000 excuse me -- barrels per day, and 25 percent were to be moved into the pipeline, we would be moving approximately 175,000 barrels of North Dakota oil down this pipeline every day. Well, what does this do for South Dakota?  While I won't quote the statistics I can say I have personally seen the numbers impacting the State of South Dakota and in terms of increased employment, income, and tax revenue. And it is definitely good for South Dakota. And it is definitely a step towards energy independence and barrels of oil we don't have to purchase from an unstable Middle East country. Therefore, I respectfully urge you to conclude the review process and approve the presidential permit. Thank you.    
MS. COLEMAN: Thank you. So now I would like to call #27 Dave Collyer, #28 Charles Barnard, #29 Doug Hardy, and #30 Jack Orzechouski.  
MR. COLLYER: Good morning. I am Dave Collyer. I'm the President of the Canadian Association of Petroleum Producers.  Let me start by just being very clear about why I am here. It's clearly for the U.S. to decide what is in America's national interest. Our interest is in making sure that this decision is based on objective analysis and is as well informed as possible and in that vein I'd like to offer five points for your consideration.  First, in our view, this is not at all about the U.S. using our oil. The question is where is that oil to be sourced from, Canada or elsewhere, and in our opinion, you are much better served by sourcing that increased oil, increased in terms of the proportion of oil that's being used in the U.S.  from Canada rather than from foreign sources.  Second, this is about energy security for North America. Canada has the world's third largest reserves of crude oil, we currently supply about 20% of the U.S. imports, we've got the opportunity to significantly grow that volume over the next 10 to 15 years and we would like to do so and we would like to sell it to the United States.  Third, this is about job creation. The development of the oil sands and the related infrastructure has the potential and is currently creating tens of thousands of jobs in both Canada and the United States. We've identified in excess of 2,400 companies in 49 states of the United States that currently supply goods or services to oil sands development or related infrastructure and there is an opportunity to grow that number with approval of this project.  Fourth, this is about continuous improvement in environmental performance. We stand by our record in Canada in the oil and gas industry in terms of environmental performance. We are going to continue to improve that performance and I must -- while I fully respect the concerns that have been expressed, with respect to health impacts on local communities, I must point out that there have been several reputable health studies conducted with respect to impact of oil sands on the health of local communities and there has been no demonstrated linkage or relationship between the two.    And I also want to highlight that an in dependent crude oil quality analysis that has been conducted by an independent expert has also concluded that oil sands crude quality has no impact, no detrimental impact on pipelines that is any different or can be differentiated from that of other crude quality -- other crudes that are being transported in the U.S.  And fifth, this is about a comprehensive federal and provincial regulatory system in Canada.  As an industry we're held to a high standard, it is what we expect of ourselves, that's what our government expects and that's what we believe customers in the United States expect and we will continue to be held to that high standard and we will continue to perform to that standard.  So in closing, in your review of the project's national interest I ask you to consider environmental performance, economic benefits, and energy security and reliability. Our view is that this approach stands up extremely well on all of those counts. We ask you to consider each one of them. Thank you very much.  
MS. COLEMAN: Thank you.    
MR. BARNARD: Good morning. My name is Charles Barnard and I'm speaking on my own behalf. I am now from Virginia but I grew up in Northern Montana within 40 miles of Port Morgan where the Keystone XL pipeline is proposed to enter the U.S.  I am here today in support of the pipeline. I believe that Keystone XL pipeline is in our country's national interest. It will improve our national security, contribute to a long-term stable energy supply for the United States and create jobs.  The pipeline will provide oil to refineries along the Texas Gulf Coast. We do think our dependence on oil imports from unreliable overseas sources. By supporting domestic production and by importing oil from Canada instead of from overseas countries, we will strengthen both our national security and our energy security. The pipeline is expected to create thousands of U.S. jobs in the near term as well as provide billions in tax revenue in the corridor states. Keystone XL will join thousands of miles of pipeline already working efficiently and productively in the U.S. Thank you.    
MS. COLEMAN: Thank you.  
MR. HARDY: Good morning. I'm Doug Hardy.  I appreciate the opportunity today. I'm testifying on behalf of myself as a resident of Montana and as a manager of Central Montana Electric Power Cooperative based in Great Falls, Montana, feeding the supply to electric cooperatives. I will not quote the statistics of the tens of thousands of jobs created directly or indirectly, but we will share four reasons I believe this pipeline is in the nation's interest. One is energy independence.  I'll paraphrase being how t hat was hit fairly hard, that this pipeline is not just about Canadian oil. The on ramp in the Baker area has some of the nicest oil you'll ever like, if you can like oil. It's on ramp, many thousands of barrels a day.  We look at that as a way to get that oil to market and decrease our dependence on foreign oil, but clearly, if we can decrease our dependence through less usage, that's great, we still need imports. If we can decrease our usage on more domestic, we still need imports. Let that import come from a friendly nation, one who supports us, not one who wants to see the demise of our society.  Affordable energy rates, they drive our economy. Energy prices go up, economy goes down, short of any other factors, jobs are lost when energy prices go up. We've seen that in our area, it's a fact that low cost energy has attracted many, many industries to the Pacific Northwest. From a standpoint of jobs, having affordable energy is just critical to maintain an economy and not lose jobs.  On the local level, much of our educational funding in Montana is from property tax from homeowners, from industry all around. The tax basis it would create is tremendous and that dollar not only funds university systems, it funds also the state and local schools and helps the people afford what they are doing and properly educating our country.  And in education, it's a never ending issue. Bottom line, tankers bringing oil from other countries, they have environmental risk, but they don't pay any taxes to local communities for our schools.  The pipeline brings the oil through and absolutely helps the local schools and county governments that it goes through. And you know, in our area we've got hundreds of easement we haven't condemned. The people have been supportive. It's interesting that we find how unsupportive people are in Montana from people who may have never been there.  Lastly, its jobs as it relates to family, my very last point, and it's critical to me. I'm not expert as what to say, what brings self-esteem to a person, to be a good member of their family, I do know I've seen people that appear to have very high self esteem, that are wonderful productive members of the society who, upon a job loss, loose self esteem and are no longer as productive in society and a weak economy give societal problems all over the place in regards to self esteem.  I want my daughters, my grandkids to have jobs that are quality, as we ramp ourselves to more independence. Thank you very much.  
MS. COLEMAN: Thank you very much.    
MS. COLEMAN: Yes. Now we would like to call Father Jack Orzechouski. 
FATHER JACK ORZECHOUSKI: I'm the Franciscan Fryer representing the Franciscan Action Network, which is a leading Franciscan voice in the United States advocating for social and environmental justice. I'm also representing the National Interfaith Power and Light.  Both of these organizations oppose granting the permit for the Keystone XL pipeline. We find this project morally indefensible. The tar sands project will lead to a massive expansion of the extraction of the nonconventional fossil fuels.  This is very dangerous move. Our prolonged addiction to dirty fossil fuel has put us on the cusp of radical and irreversible changes to earth's atmosphere. We are already witnessing glaciers melting, sea level rising, increased storms, floods, draughts, millions of people being displaced, rapid loss of biodiversity. The survival of billions of people is at stake, also as much as half of the earth species are being wiped out -- can be wiped out by the end of the century.  There is another reason why the tar sands pipeline is morally inexcusable. It will endanger the indigenous community, threaten one of the largest Aquifer in our continent and imperil the lives of the people that depend on it. Also, it is the poor, the vulnerable and the voiceless that are bearing the brunt of the global climate change that will be greatly intensified by the full scale tar sands operation.  As many as 600 million people could face malnutrition and hunger all over the world. Approving the Keystone XL pipeline runs the risk of condemning the poorest of the world to desperate struggle for food and survival. A Franciscan tradition holds out the sacredness of all live. God's creation has a profound value and meaning. We human share with the rest of God's creation, not only the common origin, but also destiny. The Judeo-Christian tradition teaches that human family can find true peace, security, only when we live together as brothers and sisters in integrity, in justice, in harmony with the earth.  A debate over the Keystone XL pipeline ought to be formed by the values of love, of solidarity, of special concern for the poor and most vulnerable, the common good of all God's creation.  The Keystone XL pipeline is being framed as a solution to America's energy needs that would spur job creation. It is a dangerous mirage. The economy exists within the limits of the natural world.  
MS. COLEMAN: Sir -- Father I mean. The time is coming to an end. 
FATHER JACK ORZECHOUSKI: Yes.  
MS. COLEMAN: I would invite you to put your comments on the table. 
FATHER JACK ORZECHOUSKI: In conclusion on behalf of the Franciscan Action Network and Interfaith Power Light, I urge the State Department and President Obama to deny the permit for the tar sands pipeline. Prolonging our deadly addiction to dirty fossil fuel would be devastating for life on the planet, for people, and the economy. This is immoral and is not in the national interest of the United States. Thank you.    
MS. COLEMAN: Thank you very much. Now #31 Mari Castellanos, #32 Jane Kleeb, #33 Yiming Roberts, and #34 Kate Simolski. Thank you.  
MS. CASTELLANOS: Buenos Dias. Thank you for the opportunity to speak at this hearing. I am Dr. Mari Castellanos and I am a Christian Minister in the United Church of Christ.  I come not only as a clergy person, but as a former scientist, a bird watcher, and someone who passionately loves God's blessed creation. I also come on behalf of the many children whom I dearly love. I want them to enjoy nature and all of the creator order as I have in all the glory and beauty that God made. In a recent letter to President Obama nine nobel peace laureates wrote, "the night you were nominated for President, you told the world that under your leadership the rise of the ocean will begin to slow and the planet will begin to heal." If the President consents to the Keystone XL pipeline, he will break not only his promise but the hearts of millions as well.  When I studied moral theology or Christian ethics, we were taught to look at issues through several criteria and different lenses. I can assure you that this issue, as Father just explained so well, it fails at every angle and under every criterion.  How can the destruction of the Boreal Forest, the lungs of North America, for the sake of profit, be ethical? How can we justify pushing all the birds that nest in that forest to extinction, which will surely happen because so many of them are already threatened, or endangering the source of drinking water for millions of people? Or endorsing an extraction process that causes high levels of greenhouse gas pollution, and leaves behind enormous deposits of toxic waste and is permeated by the stench of corporate greed?  This is not moral, this is not ethical, this is not who we are. As a nation we like to think of ourselves as a high moral ground people.  Approving this pipeline will surely question our perception of ourselves.  Over this year 4th of July weekend a 12- inch Exxon Mobile pipeline broke at the bottom of the Yellowstone River, spilling crude that cover more than miles of the fame waterway.  What was an oil pipeline doing beneath the Yellowstone River? I frantically asked and found out  
MS. COLEMAN: Yes, unfortunately our time is at an end. May I ask that you finish off with a sentence.  
MS. CASTELLANOS: I would like to say, there is a racial divide in this room and it breaks my heart because study after study, sponsored by my church, the United Church of Christ, tells you that the waste of all toxic development, usually winds up in African American and Latin and Native American communities. Don't allow a false sense of gain to divide the people of color on this issue. We always stand to lose.    
MS. COLEMAN: Thank you very much.  
MS. KLEEB: Hello, my name is Jane Kleeb and I am from Hastings, Nebraska. I stand here today with the daughter of a rancher who I hope you will allow me to split my time with. We are the pipeline fighters. We are the sand hills lovers. We are the Ogallala Aquifer lovers and we are begging you, not asking, we are begging you to deny this pipeline permit.  Every day we fight and ask our elected officials to stand up for us, to do the right thing and change the path of this pipeline. It is going through the most fragile part of our state, the sand hills and it is crushing through the Ogallala Aquifer, which provides drinking water for not only our state, but for the very food that we eat every day for the farmers and ranchers. And so we are begging, do not stand with the foreign oil corporation, stand with Americans, stand with Nebraskans, stand with our families and please deny this permit.    
MS. LUEBBE: Hi, my name is Laura Luebbe.  I live on my ranch south of Stewart, Nebraska and I know for many of the people in here, home is the place where you go, it's your sanctuary, it's your safe place, it's where you can be yourself and to have a foreign company come in and try to take that away from you and everything you have and you live for and you work so hard to make it throughout life, and they try to take it away, it really hurts, and these workers sit here and laugh and boo, it really hurts that they think they can do that and you don't realize how hard we work to get them food, to give ourselves food and make a living.  I know everybody works hard but it's not the easiest job in the world. I do the best I can to work out there and make a living for myself. I pay my own cell phone bill, I pay for my contact, everything, and I work for that, and I know we all work in here for money and stuff, but there is so many other ways and better jobs we can do than put a pipeline that's just going to hurt America and cause health problems and stuff like cancer. I don't want to have to deal with that, I really don't. So I urge the President and Hillary Clinton not to put this pipeline in. Thank you.    
MS. COLEMAN: Thank you very much.  
MS. CLAB: And we will submit this arm band and you can boo all you want, but we will submit this arm band for Secretary Clinton and President Obama to join us and be pipeline fighters and be sand hill lovers and be Ogallala Aquifer lovers. We're depending on you, we're counting on you.    
MS. ROBERTS: Good evening. My name is Yiming Roberts and I'm here today as a citizen, concerned about the future of my country and particularly about the world that my two and a half year old niece will inherit. After hearing the stories of people who have been suffering from and fighting the tar sands development, which is endangering their way of life, as well as the fact that NASA Scientist Dr. James Hansen has called development of the tar sands game over for the climate, I knew I had to take a stand.  Along with 1,252 other people, I was arrested outside the White House last month, to let President Obama know I want him to say no to the Keystone XL pipeline. I traveled to Ottawa to support our friends in Canada who are fighting the Keystone XL and the dirty, dangerous tar sands development.  There is a lot at stake here today. We are at a critical juncture and we have a great opportunity to change the path we've been on.  Approving the Keystone XL pipeline would perpetuate the broken system in which corporations do not seek consent to extract wealth from the people and form the earth. In this dirty fossil fuel based system, profit is prioritized over people and the self- interest of corporations over justice for all. Building this pipeline creates clear winners and losers. The winners are the tar sands industry and their investors, and the losers are the rest of us, our children, future generations, and all live on the planet.  Many people, including Presidents Bush and Obama have discussed our addiction to oil. The way to cure an addict is not by giving them an even low grade, dirtier version of their drug of choice, renewable energy is clearly the better option.  We don't need to wait 20 years to deploy a silver bullet technology, we can deploy currently existing technologies. We s imply need the political will to make the necessary changes equal to the magnitude of the problem.  No one can deny the tremendous power of the fossil fuel industry. The industry takes generous taxpayer subsidies and repays the public by giving our children asthma, poisoned water, polluted air, misinformation campaigns and irreversible climate change.  This influence extends beyond human and environmental impacts reaching into our political process. Cardno Entrix, a contractor for TransCanada ran the public hearings along the proposed routes of the pipeline. This same contractor even drafted the State Department's Environmental Impact Statement, an obvious conflict of interest.  The future that we will all share depends upon the moral choices that are made today. As you take this opportunity to set the U.S. on a renewable energy path, by rejecting the Keystone XL pipeline remember, ecology is the foundation for our economy and all life. Say no to the Keystone XL pipeline and move us toward a just and equitable future for all.  Thank you.    
MS. COLEMAN: Thank you very much.  Please.  
MS. CASEY-LEFKOWITZ: Thank you. The person who held #34 has ceded their place to me. My name is Susan Casey-Lefkowitz and I am here representing the 1.3 million members and activists of the Natural Resources Defense Council, and I want to first applaud the many speakers that we've heard today. These are clearly deep issues on both sides that a pipeline like this raises up.  And I'm going to speak to just one very specific point and that is that yesterday, 218 business leaders from across the country sent a letter to President Obama calling on him to reject the Keystone XL tar sands pipeline as not being in our economic interest.  Business leaders and investors with a stake in the clean energy economy are sending a clear message. The Keystone XL tar sands pipeline will undermine our efforts to move forward with clean energy, jobs, and investments.  It is not in our economic interest to support expansion of the tar sands oil industry. Providing input into the national interest determination process around the pipeline in this letter, these business leaders find, "permitting the Keystone XL pipeline is a long-term investment in tar sands oil, one of the most carbon and water intensive fuels under development. If constructed, this pipeline will undermine the U.S. commitment to a transition to a clean and sustainable energy future.  The letter provides a solution. We urge you to reject projects that are so detrimental to America's clean energy economy by finding that the Keystone XL tar sands pipeline is not in our national interest."  Coming from business owners, investors, economists, and many others who are deeply committed to America's clean energy economy. This letter should carry a lot of weight in this national interest determination process.  The signatories of the letter are members of a group called Environmental Entrepreneurs or E2, with which the Natural Resources Defense Council works very closely. E2 is a non-partisan, national community of members who manage over $90 billion in private equity capital that nourishes our economy. E2 members have a real stake in this issue, they are the ones on the front lines in the United States helping us to achieve a clean energy economy, by investing in companies and creating jobs.  E2 members are concerned with tar sands expansion. America will be going after a source of oil that as you have heard, actually undermines jobs in our country. They're concerned that tar sands will increase our dependence on ever more expensive and risky forms of oil and they are concerned that despite the energy security arguments made by the pipeline proponents, this pipeline actually endangers American economic interests by exporting tar sands abroad.  And they know from their own investments and experience that this is the time for us to stay committed to American ingenuity and American clean energy, businesses, jobs, and investments.  The business community is sending a clear message to the Administration. Thank you so much for listening and we will be submitting the letter for the record.  
MS. COLEMAN: Thank you very much.    
MS. COLEMAN: Now we're going to call #35 Bill Erasmus and then #36 Tiernan Sittenfeld, #37 John Elwood, and #38 Lara Skinner. Thank you.  
MR. ERASMUS: Thank you Madam Chair. My name is Bill Erasmus. I am Chief of the Dene Nation.  I come from Northern Canada, north of the tar sands development. We are downstream.  We have 30 communities and the population of our area is approximately 50,000 people. We are party to peace and friendship treaties with Great Britain. As original peoples we entered into those agreements because Canada as a young country didn't have the authority to sign the treaties.  Canada is a part of the commonwealth and they have to adhere to the legal agreements that we have and in fact the resource that you talk about here is still in question because when we entered into those agreements there were peace and friendship, we never extinguished the oil or the other resources that are on those lands and those are part of treaty #8 which I am a member of.  Thank you for this opportunity. I want to present to you, when I'm finished, an Accord that was put together. It's called the Mother Earth Accord.  It was put together a month ago on the Rosebud Indian Reservation with tribal leaders, First Nation leaders from the Canada side and property owners from the U.S., because of the concern that we have.  Attached to this there are 60 to 70 endorsement letters and support from across the country and actually internationally. The Accord outlines our concerns so I will give that to you formally. What I want to say is that we have some of the largest fresh water in the world, where we come from. As I said, the water comes downstream from the tar sands and what happens through the process is that a large amount of water is used to process the oil and the water then is no longer useable afterwards because it's put into tailings ponds with very toxic waste, which is then leached into the environment, come downstream to us.  We're finding with the amount of water used, our water levels have dropped at least 10 feet.  We also are very concerned about the quality, and other people have spoken to that. What we want to say is that this is not in the Canadian interest, this is not in the American interest, in our view, this oil will go to the refineries in Texas and then out to the world to the highest bidders. That doesn't assist any of us.  We believe that President Obama has an opportunity here to put the Bush Administration plans aside and to begin in a new way.  And the final point I'd like to make is that we are very concerned that the Canadian industry and the Canadian government in particular are promoting this project. They should not be doing that. If this project is sound and has merit, it will stand on its own. Thank you very much.  
MS. COLEMAN: Thank you very much.    
MS. SITTENFELD: My name is Tiernan Sittenfeld and I am the Senior Vice President for Government Affairs with the League of Conservation Voters which works to turn environmental values into national priorities. Thank you for the opportunity to testify today on behalf of our members across the country.  LCV joins mayors, scientists, Nobel Peace laureates, unions, landowners, religious leaders, and millions of others from across the country in urging the State Department to deny the permit to build the Keystone XL pipeline. This harmful pipeline would transport tar sands oil, the dirtiest oil on the planet, which is why as I speak, there is a large rally right outside this very building to protest its construction.  This pipeline would threaten the environment with far more global warming pollution than conventional crude oil. It is in direct conflict with the many positive steps this administration is taking to reduce global warming pollution.  For example, the Environmental Protection Agency has estimated that this pipeline could add an additional 27 million metric tons of greenhouse gases into the atmosphere in 2018, which is like adding an additional 4.8 million cars to the road.  This would clearly offset the emissions reduction achieved by the EPA's recently proposed tailpipe standards for medium and light duty trucks.  In addition to being disastrous when it comes to combating global climate change, this pipeline would also jeopardize surrounding communities, ecosystems and watersheds.  There have been all too many recent reminders of the threats from oil spills which are exacerbated by tar sands oil since it is more corrosive and abrasive than conventional crude oil. For example, the original Keystone pipeline has already had at least 14 spills in the United States and 19 in Canada. A serious spill could contaminate the Midwest Ogallala Aquifer which others have already spoken so eloquently about.  For the reasons I have mentioned and for so many others, this pipeline is simply not in the national interest. To the contrary, it is just another harmful proposal pushed by big oil and its allies in Congress in order to promote the failed energy policy of the past rather than pursuing clean energy solution that will create jobs, improve our national security, and protect the planet from global warming pollution.  It is time to break our dependence on dirty and dangerous fossil fuels once and for all. We urge the State Department to deny TransCanada's permit to build the Keystone XL tar sands pipeline.  Thank you.  
MS. COLEMAN: Thank you very much.    
MR. ELWOOD: Good afternoon. My name is John Elwood. I am an Evangelical Christian, an Elder of the Presbyterian Church in American, a Board Member of the Evangelical Environmental Network and today I represent the MICA Institute, Greenfaith New Jersey and National Interfaith Power and Light.  Roughly 100 million Americans identify themselves as Evangelicals. We believe that the Gospel compels us to care for the created world that God created all things, that He made mankind with a special mandate to care for all that he has made.  That the creation, whether pure or despoiled, is the inheritance of our Lord Jesus Christ and in a world where degradation of the world is responsible for much hunger, sickness, and conflict, we hear the command of Jesus to serve the hungry, the homeless, and the oppressed as the least of these brothers of mine.  For these reasons, our faith compels us to urge our leaders as we follow Christ, not to proceed with the proposed pipeline project. We take this position for the following reasons: First, the exploitation of the tar sands threatens to severely harm human health, especially amongst indigenous peoples both by the devastation of vast tracks of Canadian ancestral lands and waterways and by highly likely future threats to American waterways and Aquifers.  Second, the tar sands are among the most carbon polluting of any fuels known to man. With lifecycle greenhouse gases that the EPA has estimated to be roughly 82% greater than comparable emissions from conventional petroleum. As such, they harm vulnerable people all over the earth. Third, at a time when we need to invest heavily in non-carbon polluting energy solutions, the last gasp exploitation of nonconventional fuels such as the tar sands, represents a huge step backward.  Wedding our economies to unusually dirty fuels for generations.  Fourth, without this pipeline the damage from tar sands operations will be restricted for years into the future. Its expansion depends on this project. Fifth, the job creation and the energy independence touted by promoters of the pipeline are illusory. Among scores of flaws they ignore the job- killing impacts of increasing severe droughts and floods and the clearly stated plans by multi-national oil companies to export the tar sands products, not used them in the United States. When we consider these factors, the Keystone XL pipeline directly or indirectly contributes to results which are contrary to the Kingdom of God. Harming his creation and threatening the balances through which He has blessed the earth and its people. Thank you very much.  
MS. COLEMAN: Thank you for your comments.    
MS. SKINNER: Hi, my name is Dr. Lara Skinner. I am with Cornell University's Global Labor Institute School of Industrial and Labor Relations.  Thank you for the opportunity to speak today. Cornell released a report last week examining the jobs claims by TransCanada Corporation and the American Petroleum Institute. TransCanada, the American Petroleum Institute and other proponents of the pipeline claim Keystone XL is a $7 billion project that will create 20,000 direct construction and manufacturing jobs and 119,000 indirect jobs.  However, Cornell's analysis of Keystone XL has found that TransCanada's numbers are unsubstantiated and that the project will produce far fewer jobs than they claim. In fact, Cornell's careful and more comprehensive analysis reveals that construction of Keystone XL may destroy more jobs than it creates.  I want to underscore four main points that explain why construction of Keystone XL may destroy more jobs than it creates.  First, TransCanada claims that Keystone XL is a $7 billion project. Actually Keystone XL U.S. project budget is only $3.3 billion. TransCanada has inflated the U.S. project budget by including $1.6 billion that will be spent in Canada and approximately $2.6 billion that has already been spent or committed for the project.  In reality, Keystone U.S. project budget is less than half what TransCanada claims and this means a lot less jobs will be created.  Second, steel pipe is the main material input for Keystone XL. To date, TransCanada has already manufactured almost 50% of the pipe outside of the U.S. even though they claim Keystone XL will create 7,000 manufacturing jobs in the U.S.  TransCanada has made a significant investment in the pipe for Keystone XL that is largely creating economic activity and jobs outside of the U.s.  Third, according to TransCanada own data supplied to the State Department, the project will create no more than 2,500 to 4,650 temporary direct construction jobs for two years and only 10 to 15 percent of the total Keystone XL workforce will be hired locally.  Fourth, because of the pipeline, Midwest consumers will pay 10 to 20 cents more per gallon of gas and fuel, totaling two to four billion additional cost to Midwest economies. Just one year of fuel price increases as a result of Keystone XL diverting oil from Midwest to Gulf Coast refineries would cancel out some or all of the jobs created by the project. TransCanada has also ignored and dismissed fears that Keystone XL will have a serious impact on our environment and our economy through spills, spills into freshwater supplies or increases in greenhouse gases and other pollutant. Put simply, pipeline spills, pollution and climate change incur huge costs and destroy jobs.  I want to conclude by saying that the number of jobs that could be created by the construction of Keystone XL is by no means insignificant especially to the working people that receive these jobs. However, the U.S. is currently facing a serious unemployment problem and this problem should not be trivialized by TransCanada Corporation vastly overstating the number of jobs that will be created by Keystone XL.    
MS. COLEMAN: Ma'am if you could.  
MS. SKINNER: TransCanada and other proponents of Keystone XL have done an injustice to the American public by raising expectations for jobs that simply cannot be met. The U.S. needs a jobs plan but Keystone XL is not it. Thank you.    
MS. COLEMAN: Thank you very much. Now I'd like to call #39 Susan Connolly, #40 Marty Cobenais, #41 Deborah Lynn, and #42 David Friedman. Thank you.  
MS. CONNOLLY: I am Susan Connolly, a resident of Marshall, Michigan, where close to 1 million gallon of tar sands crude spilled in Talmadge Creek in the Kalamazoo River.  I'm here today as the voice of the communities that have been affected by this spill.  The spill occurred right in the middle of some of the most sensitive wetland areas in the state. I'd like to present a CD to you that illustrates the impact of a tar sands spill.  Fourteen months have passed with questions left unanswered and residents concerns lingered to this day. When, it's not a matter of if, but when, when will the next pipeline break occur and where.  These questions must be on your minds.  When a spill occurred, first responders, health officials were caught off guard. A lack of training, lack of communication, and the failure to properly evacuate residents, coupled with all of the unknowns, led to this tragic event.  I say unknown because this spill was the first of its kind. I find it unconstitutional that the health and wellbeing of the environment and our citizens and my children have been set aside for the sake of the transportation of tar sands oil. When spills occur, and accusatory finger is pointed at the pipeline company but should be focused toward our government as well. State and federal government fail to protect the people and the environment. The Department of Transportation was aware of violations eight years prior to the Michigan spill. What good are corrective action orders if they are not enforced? It's a shared negligence.  I ask you why, why would you approve the construction of yet another pipeline when the existing line possess defects that have not been corrected and are regulated by federal policies that are lacking.  Why? Why would our government allow materials like tar sands crude to flow through pipelines, new or old, when no one has anyone idea how to clean it up? They're still trying to figure out to this day in our town. Questions, fears related to long-term health, the destruction of our ecosystem and the potential effects for our infrastructure are all on the list of unknowns.  Before you vote on the Keystone pipeline, I invite each and every one of you and your families and your children, please come to Michigan, come to my hometown, look at our river, look what it has become, I ask you to walk on our riverbank, swim in our river, and then tell me how safe you feel. Thank you for your time.    
MS. COLEMAN: Thank you very much.  
MR. COBENAIS: My name is Marty Cobenais.  I am the pipeline organizer for the Indigenous Environmental Network, based up in Bemidji, Minnesota. Indigenous tribes in the U.S. and Canada stand united in opposition to the Keystone XL pipeline. We have created the Mother Earth Accord that Chief Bill Erasmus earlier presented to you in which support has come from national, regional, and individual tribes, along with numerous individuals from Nebraska, basically all of Holt County, Nebraska has signed the Agreement.  Yesterday we met with the State Department Assistant Secretary Dr. Kerry Ann Jones, who told us that they were having an independent risk assessment being conducted on this Keystone XL pipeline. We see this as a direct result of recent allegations and e- mails of corruption between the State Department and the applicant, TransCanada.  The State Department would not give us any other further information such as who is doing this assessment, if the results would be made public for comment, but they did state that the results would be completed prior to the presidential permit decision is decided.  If this is truly a transparent good will offering, these results should be made public and we should have comments, have the ability to have comments on it before the decision is made. In accordance with the United Nations declaration of the indigenous race and the executive order by President Obama, there is supposed to be free and prior consent with tribes. This has not happened in the United States with the State Department yet on this issue.  The State Department has failed to meet in commitment with tribes along the route. The State Department has threatened to withhold funds for tribes to have monitors on the pipeline route if they did not concur with the program agreement.  They have also failed to meet on government to government level with Lakota, Dakota, and Nakota tribes in the South Dakota, about the water pipeline that Deb White Plume talked about earlier that supplies water to tribes in rural communities in South Dakota where water is already polluted from years or uranium mining. Ogallala President John Yellowbird Steel questioned if the tribe would be held liable if the water pipeline was polluted by oil pipeline. He did not receive an answer.  In the words of the Great Chief Red Cloud, they have made many promises to us, more than I can remember, but they kept one, they promised to take our land, and they did. We also like to make it know that we, the Indians, stand in unity with the cowboys, the ranchers, and the farmers along the proposed routes. We sympathize with them as they are the modern day Indians. Their land is being taken away for pennies on the dollar just as ours was. We feel that the State Department is backed into a corner right now with all the corruption allegations and with the failure to meet with tribal governments on this issue.  Therefore, the only way to clear them of themselves and with the Nation, is to deny the presidential permit and to say no to the keystone XL pipeline. Thank you.    
MS. COLEMAN: Thank you very much.  
MR. KOHL-RIGGS: Hi, there was a mix-up with the numbers. I am #41, my name is Arthur Kohl- Riggs.  
MS. COLEMAN: Could you spell your last name please, thank you.  
MR. KOHL-RIGGS: KOHL-RIGGS.  
MS. COLEMAN: Thank you.  
MR. KOHL-RIGGS: I have four main points, but first I would like to thank the gentleman from Montana with the fun hat, for his honesty. I am pleased that he said what many others have a hard time saying. Those wars we are fighting, they are about the oil.  Labor community members here today, I am from Wisconsin. I occupy our state capitol for three weeks fighting Scott Walker's attack on the workers and the Wisconsin people and I have fought every day for the past seven months for your rights.  You are being lied to and used. This pipeline is a dangerous, violent substitution for the millions of clean energy jobs we were promised and desperately need in this country. If you want sustainable long-term jobs, this is the wrong project.  I have been to Ft. McMurray in Alberta, Canada where most of the tar sands extraction takes place. Simply being in the area made me sick. I'm not saying that as a metaphor or hyperbole, it made me literally sick. Go there, drink the water and breathe the air and I promise you will become sick as well.  Obama, in your campaign you promised me a clean energy future. That future is impossible if this proposed pipeline becomes a reality. This pipeline will solidify our addiction to dirty fossil fuels. Obama, please uphold the very vocal promise you made to me, and millions of others when you campaigned for my vote. A clean energy future takes real change and leadership now. Finally, I said I was from Wisconsin and right now there is an ongoing John Doe FBI investigation about the pay to play politics and the inappropriate corporate cronyism of Scott Walker and his administration.  Secretary Clinton, I would have thought you were above that type of leadership. Your personal and professional relationships with TransCanada are inappropriate. Regardless if this pipeline is in the nation's best interest, it is definitely a definitely a conflict of your interest.  Arrest Scott Walker, deny this pipeline. Thank you.    
MS. COLEMAN: Thank you.  
MR. FRIEDMAN: Good morning. My name is David Friedman. I am with the National Petrochemical Refiners Association, otherwise known as NPRA. NPRA appreciates the opportunity this morning to provide comments in the Keystone XL pipeline project. NPRA represents more than 450 businesses including virtually all U.S. refineries and petrochemical manufacturers, their suppliers, and vendors. Our members supply consumers with a wide variety of products used daily in their homes and businesses including fuels, lubricants, and chemicals that serves building blocks from everything from plastics to clothing to medicine to computers.  NPRA supports the Keystone XL pipeline project because it would strengthen our country's national and economic security. Our members depend on a secure and reliable supply of crude oil and as the first purchases of oil in the market, are significantly affected by volatile crude prices.  Despite advancements in other forms of energy, everyone agrees the United States and the rest of the world will continue to rely on petroleum in the distant future. As our economy continues to struggle out of the recession, the Keystone XL pipeline will create and sustain thousands of U.S. jobs and benefit local communities through increased business activity and tax revenue.  The Canadian Energy Research Institute estimates the pipeline would provide close to 85,000 U.S. jobs by 2020 and could support 465,000 jobs by 2035. Also, as Americans struggle to fill their gas tanks, the completion of the Keystone XL pipeline can make an important contribution to lowering oil cost by increasing the crude supplies in North America.  Canada is currently the largest source of petroleum imports to the United States, providing nearly two million barrels of oil per day. The proposed Keystone XL pipeline expansion allows to increase these imports from a North American ally by more than 500,000 barrels per day.  Allowing U.S. refineries to use more Canadian crude will make our nation less reliant on oil imports from unstable regions of the world and less vulnerable to potential supply disruptions.  If America chooses not to accept the Canadian oil, China and other nations across the Pacific will be more than happy to buy it. That would require shipping Canadian oil across the ocean and would force the United States to ship in more oil from elsewhere. This transoceanic traffic would cause a lot more energy and would increase the carbon footprint of transporting the oil which will actually increase global GHG emissions.  For all these reasons, getting more oil from Canada makes sense. If we turn our back on this important source of energy, we will be imposing economic sanctions on ourselves. Thank you.    
MS. COLEMAN: Thank you very much. Now I would like to call the next four, this looks like Joelle Novey, #44 Danielle Droitsch, #45 Dean Hubbard, and #46 Lorne Stockman. Thank you.  
MS. NOVEY: Joelle Novey with Interfaith Power and Light. Through Interfaith Power and Light, 14,000 congregations of all religious traditions around the country work together on energy and climate issues and I am submitting into the record today, hundreds of comment cards from local churches and synagogues where good folks have concluded that the Keystone XL pipeline would do great harm and that their religious traditions call them to speak out.  These cards join thousands of online comments sent from religious folks around the country and they join the testimony of religious leaders at previous hearings in Kansas, Nebraska, and Texas.  When the sun sets this evening, I will join millions of Jewish Americans in marking the holiest day of our year, Yom Kippur, the Day of Atonement. For me, this is a day to tune out distractions and to be honest with myself about whether or not I am on the right path.  A New York Times editorial this week spoke against the Keystone XL pipeline. The paper cited concerns I share about the damage tar sands extraction does to Canada's Boreal Forest and the risks the pipeline poses to America's drinking water. But the editorial concluded with a larger question: should this country keep conducting business as usual or will we seriously grapple with the reality of climate change? This is the choice before you today. This is our nation's Yom Kippur moment.  The concentrations of heat-trapping gases in our atmosphere are already higher than they have been in hundreds of thousands of years and warming temperatures are already causing stronger storms, devastating droughts and great suffering all around the world.  The path we are on is treacherous. If we build this pipeline to extract every last drop of oil from the tar sands and push the concentration of pollution in our atmosphere to the point that we permanently damage our earth's climate, any arguments you have heard today in support of the pipeline short-term benefits will pale in comparison.    The human suffering that will be caused by our nation continuing along the fossil fuel path we are on is catastrophic. Every single person who works at the State Department is also a human being who lives on earth and who hopes for their children and grandchildren to also live on earth.  You surely know in your hearts that at some point our nation will be forced to shift away from dirty fuels, no matter which foreign corporation stand to benefit from further delay and to turn instead towards investing in clean energy and repairing our climate. But it matters when we make that decision.  As Bill McGiven has said, physics and chemistry don't bargain. They don't give us much time and they're bad at haggling. We cannot wait to turn back until after this pipeline is built. We must turn back beforehand.  On this Yom Kippur, this day of moral clarity, please tune out distractions, please have the integrity instead to simply make the right decision for the people of the United States and the people of the world. Please do not approve the Keystone XL pipeline.    
MS. COLEMAN: Thank you.  
MS. KAPLAN: I traded an earlier spot to speak now. I am Ruth Kaplan. I am a Past National Energy Committee Chair for the Sierra Club and I chair national campaign defending water for life for the Alliance for Democracy.  I'm not here today to argue about psi pressure or parts per million, I'm not here today to say move the pipeline one mile in one direction or the other, I'm not here to say put the inspectors along the pipeline every 10 miles or every 1 mile, I am here today to speak for my godson, for my grandson, for Malia, for Sasha and for Chelsea. And so I will read to you part of what my godson's mother wrote. After being arrested in front of the White House, protesting the pipeline, a few days before I, too was arrested. She said, as I stood before the White House gates, listening to the police issue their warnings of our impending arrest, to our group of over 100 demonstrators, I thought I would say as they kept carting me away, what cry I wanted the President to hear and I recalled the day Obama stood before the American people in those days and months as BP's deep water well bellowed millions of barrels of oil from that horrifying wound in the Gulf of Mexico floor.  I remembered him remarking that yes, he was concerned about the spill because while he shaved one morning, his 11 year old daughter Malia said, did you plug the hole yet daddy? Children have a way of speaking to our hearts and so I am mused, even if President Obama didn't hear the songs and the chants of more than 1,000 people who were arrested over the course of two weeks, even if the prayers of religious leaders and Native American elders went unanswered, even if he didn't read the editorial opposing the Keystone XL pipeline in the New York Times, even if he ignored the advice of his very own EPA, perhaps in this instance, Sasha or Malia might see us outside the White House gates and ask their dad, did you stop the pipeline yet daddy?  As the police handcuffed my hands behind me and led me off to a white school bus, I shouted, for Sasha and Malia. I don't think Obama or his daughters heard me. I thought as I watched my fellow protesters be cuffed, searched and photographed through the buses caged windows, perhaps if we keep this up, they will.  And I am here today to keep this up. Mr.  President, do this for Malia and Sasha, not for Jeff Berman, your former national delegate director and current lobbyist for the Keystone XL pipeline. Secretary Clinton do this for Chelsea and her future children, your grandchildren, and not for Paul Elliott, senior official for your presidential bid and now lobbyist for Keystone XL pipeline. Did you stop the pipeline today Daddy? I hope the President hears us.    
MS. COLEMAN: Thank you very much.  
MS. DROITSCH: Good afternoon. My name is Danielle Droitsch, I am with the Natural Resources Defense Council and I'm here to talk to you a little bit about how Keystone XL pipeline is not in the national interest because it is wholly inconsistent with the Obama administration's goals to combat climate change and reduce greenhouse gases.  Approving Keystone XL pipeline would lock the U.S. into high carbon infrastructure lasting at least 50 years. Tar sands are significantly more greenhouse gas intensive than your conventional oil and the U.S. State Department has acknowledged this much in the Final Environmental Impact Statement stating that the tar sands is more greenhouse gas intensive than conventional oil and more greenhouse gas intensive than the crudes that they would displace in U.S., including heavy Mexican and Venezuelan. .  The EPA has estimated the annual emissions from the project to be 27 million metric tons, equivalent greater than U.S. crude. These are additive emissions above and beyond what would occur without the pipeline. It is equivalent to the emissions of 7 coal-fired power plants every year or putting 5 million more cars on the road. It is notable that if the U.S. approves the pipeline they would be effectively undoing the gains that would occur from the recently finalized car and light truck greenhouse gas regulations and it would also threaten gains made with the long-term goals of the medium and heavy duty truck rules.  But the State Department significantly erred in its analysis in the Final Environmental Impact Statement that Keystone would not result in greater greenhouse gas emissions. And they are relying -- you are relying on faulty analysis concluding that tar sands did not flow through Keystone it would somehow find its way to market by other means.  This is a false argument. In the end, these other means are speculative, uncertain, or much longer-term options. In short, Alberta's tar sands industry, this is their best hope for their expansion plans in the tar sands and you have got to acknowledge that.  But more to the point, the State Department cannot simply avoid evaluating the possible impact of this or any other project by speculating about whether other projects can move ahead. This violates the very core of the National Environmental Policy Act.  In short, the State Department has an obligation to listen to the Environmental Protection Agency and acknowledge that Keystone will in fact add to global greenhouse emissions.  But the concern doesn't stop there.  Canadian tar sands expansion plans are directly linked to whether Keystone XL moves ahead, industry has announced their plans to expand tar sands production to as much as 7.6 million barrels a day.  The tar sands industry, the Canadian government, the Alberta government have all been vigorously defending Keystone XL because it is so essential to the continued expansion of the upstream Canadian tar sands industry.  Indeed the emissions created from producing this much tar sands compared with the equivalent amount of conventional oil would be an additional 228 million metric tons. Because Keystone is completely contrary to the Obama administration's goal to combat climate change, Keystone XL should not be found to be in the national interest. Thank you.    
MS. COLEMAN: Thank you very much.  
MR. STOCKMAN: I'm Lorne Stockman. I'm Research Director for Oil Change International, a research and advocacy group working on energy environment here in Washington, DC.  We've heard a lot of talk about energy security. People have said it's a choice between Canadian oil or Saudi oil or Venezuelan oil. That's a false choice. It's a false choice because Keystone XL is essentially an export pipeline.  We've studied this issue, we've produced the report a few weeks ago, I've submitted that into the process. The refiners in the U.S. Gulf Coast are at the forefront of the 60% increase in U.S.  petroleum products export since 2007.  Latin America and European markets need diesel and the Gulf Coast refiners are the ones that are providing it. In fact, with U.S. gasoline demand set to decline over the long term, the refiners that will receive Keystone XL crude have configured their refineries to maximize diesel production from heavy sour crude such as that from the tar sands that the pipeline will deliver.  This means the Keystone XL pipeline is serving growing, global demand rather than U.S. domestic need. The oil delivered from Canada will therefore be as well as, not instead of, other sources of heavy oil such as that from Saudi Arabia and Venezuela.  Even if that weren't the case, Canadian oil has not and cannot insulate America from the global oil market and we've seen that over the last few years. Canada has been America's largest source of imported oil since 2005. America now imports twice as much oil from Canada as it does from Saudi Arabia and 38% more than it does from the entire Middle East region.  Yet this increasing reliance on Canadian oil has not protected America from oil price spikes or oil supply disruptions.  In 2008, as oil hit $147 a barrel, United States gasoline prices spiked. This year in March and April as the Libyan civil war started, 1.6 million barrels a day came out of the market, U.S.  gasoline market spiked again along with the global oil market.  The international agency has forecast that over the next two decades even with Canadian oil and tar sands oil being produced according to industry guidelines, OPEC control over the global oil market will increase from 40% today to over 50%. The only way to make this country more secure, more energy secure is to reduce oil demand.    President Obama has set us on the road to that through the CAFE standards that he has enacted.  It's a small step forward. We need to do a lot more.  If we reduce demand in line with the limits of our climate system as the IEA has shown, we will send $5 trillion less to OPEC over the next two decades.  That's energy security and I implore the State Department to deny the permit for this pipeline.    
MS. COLEMAN: Thank you very much.  
MR. STEELE: Is Dean Hubbard here?    
MR. STEELE: Then I'll move along please to #48. Rebecca Riedl. Excuse me, #47 Patrick Spears, #48 Rebecca Riedl, #49 Mr. Jack Gerard, and #50 Kim Rickard, please.  
MR GERARD: I am Jack Gerard. Is it my turn?  
MR. STEELE: You may go ahead Mr. Gerard.  
MR. GERARD: Thank you. I am Jack Gerard, President and CEO of the American Petroleum Institute, API. We say we represent 480 large and small companies all across the United States that develop various aspect of the oil and gas that our country and our economy rely on and we support 9.2 million jobs and have given the opportunity to generate and produce oil and natural gas in this country, coupled with the approval of the Keystone XL pipeline would create another new million jobs here in the United States.  So we want to thank you for your thorough review, working with you as federal and state and local interest to make sure this process is thoroughly vetted, opportunities are given to all, much like today, to hear their views, but fundamentally it comes down to one direct question.  Is the approval of this pipeline in the national interest?  And our view is the answer is overwhelmingly yes. This pipeline has two key aspects I'd like to touch on just briefly.  First, it provides energy security for the United States. As many know Canada is our largest trading partner. We bring in more crude oil from Canada than any other nation in the world today. By expanding this opportunity we can become more secure as a nation and as a continent here in North America to have our resources locally, to fuel our economy and to provide for what it is our American citizenry need. So this makes us more energy secure as we look to the long-term.  Recent analysis shows when we combine the Canadian production, bringing us together with the Keystone XL pipeline, coupled with development of domestic oil and natural gas here in the United States, we would be energy secure in North America in 15 years. That's energy security. That's clearly in the national interest.    The second key point I would like to make is job creation. That is clearly in the national interest at a time of over 9% unemployment. Your approval of the Keystone XL pipeline will almost immediately create 20,000 new American jobs here in the United States. There are over 2,400 U.S. companies that are currently involved with the development of oil sands from 49 different states. This is not at regional impact. It's a national impact and if approval of this pipeline were to come through, it would help stimulate our economic recovery and will put us back on our feet and many here today focused on job creation and economic recovery will have the opportunity to have some of the best paying jobs in the United States.    So once again in summary, this is in the national interest. It's a job creator and it provides more energy security for the United States. We strongly endorse it and hope you will approve it quickly. Thank you very much.    
MR. SPEARS: Hello. Greetings to the State Department and all our relatives here. My name is Pat Spears. I am a member of the Lower Brule Sioux tribe and former planner and tribal chairman.  I now serve as the President of the Inner Tribal Council on Utility Policy.  I represent the renewable energy policy and development interests of some 15 tribes in the Great Plains, that Northern Plains area. Primarily the Dakotas, but we are surrounded by the States of South Dakota, North Dakota, Wyoming, and Nebraska.  I also live along the Missouri River where we get our drinking water along with many tribes along the river, probably 10 more. There are other tribes that are away from the river that are provided drinking water through the rural water systems such as Rosebud and the Ogallala Sioux tribes. The Great Plains tribal Chairman's Association and the Oklahoma tribes are opposed to the construction of the Keystone XL pipeline.    Cultural resource impacts are important to the tribes but so is the environmental damage potential to the economic and health impacts to other people and tribal populations.  There is an Executive Order, I know, that creates the presidential approval of this process here, but there is also executive orders that have equal status that demand consultation directly with the tribal governments, on a government to government basis, and the tribes want that to be upheld and practiced. The EIS finding of no significant impact on environment is just incredible, but we are told that the State Department is going to review that EIS relative to risk assessment and liability for oil spills.  We're hopeful that this will be an unbiased and independent study and the tribes will also have input in that study and be consulted by whoever that contractor is.  There is further scientific analysis necessary on this corrosive city content and pipeline oil and materials, workmanship, etcetera, from people that put those pipes in the ground. We've heard from one of those inspectors here about some of those things that were just buried and paid no attention to. You should contact the number of those other inspectors, I think. The cost of climate change must also be considered. The tar sands oil development will just push us over the carbon cliff. So we think that the economics of mining and the process of tar sands oil, including the homelands of the Cree and Dene nations in Canada must be considered, as well as the human health cost on tribal and non-tribal lands.  So the tribes in the U.S. and Canada stand together with other landowners in opposition to tar sands oil development for the pipeline construction as related in the Mother Earth Accord.  A few temporary jobs are not worth the environmental risks and human health risks. The development of tar sands oil is a huge step backwards. We need the government to support all forms of renewable energy, biofuels and electric vehicles, powered by the wind and the sun.  
MR. STEELE: Mr. Spear can you go ahead and conclude your remarks please. Thank you.  
MR. SPEARS: The development of renewable energy and transmission grid is a step forward and will create real clean jobs and restore the economy for Tribal Nations and all people in the Great Plains. So we urge the State Department and the Obama Administration to be remembered as one that respects the earth and all people of the earth. Thank you.    
MR. STEELE: Thank you.  
MS. RIEDL: Good morning, my name is Rebecca Riedl. I am from Billings, Montana. If I stumble a little bit, I've been up since 3:30 yesterday morning.  As I said, my name is Rebecca Riedl and I'm a Field Agent for the Laborers in Montana, Local 1686.    I began with the Laborers in 2008 just as the housing market and the credit industry began to crumble, but prior to working for the Laborers Union I was employed for 22 years with the AFL-CIO working with dislocated workers who lost their jobs due to various plant closures, trade readjustments -- trade deals and what not.  So I have a unique understanding of the hopelessness that all of the unemployed Americans today are facing and how they feel.  The difference between now and then as an employment training specialist was there were lots of resources available to assist them. Trade Readjustment Act money, Workforce Investment Act money, but today, with the looming deficits and the federal government facing all sorts of cuts, there isn't enough money to serve people that are unemployed right now.  The actual unemployment rate in many calculations is actually closer to 17% when you add in all the people that have exhausted their unemployment or are no longer looking for work or are underemployed. The country has never seen unemployment like this in, you know, since the Great Depression. And it was very difficult to work with people all those years who lost their jobs, they had a job for 20 years, they thought for sure that they were going to retire from there, and life would be good but they worked hard and would lose everything because they lost their job. So that's why I am here today, to implore you to fast track the approval of the presidential permit for the Keystone XL pipeline. This project requires no tax dollars, would provide infrastructure that is much needed to help develop the Bakken oil fields and the construction of this project will get thousands of people back to work very quickly.  This project is about as shovel-ready as you can get. The four unions involved in building pipelines have the ability to quickly train a large workforce. Our members will be trained not only in the pipeline construction but with heavy emphasis on safety. Our history shows that unions are the best training programs and the best safety records in the world. Never before has there been so much prime opportunity to make a big impact for jobs quickly at no cost to the taxpayer and with the unions providing the training. The country needs these jobs, this pipeline, and therefore it needs the presidential permit to be issued without delay. Thank you.    
MS. RICKARD: Good afternoon Secretary of State Clinton and the U.S. State Department hearings panel. My name is Kim Ricard and I am the Business Manager for Laborers International Union of North America, Local 1686 for Montana.    I'm here today representing 1,600 proud construction and public sector members throughout the State of Montana and I want to thank you for giving me the opportunity to speak on their behalf today regarding the TransCanada Keystone XL pipeline project.  The construction of the TransCanada Keystone XL pipeline will employ five to six hundred laborers from Local 1686 in Montana. These jobs are desperately needed as several thousand Montanans employed in the construction industry have lost jobs in the last four years.  This project will be a crucial path to allow men and women of Montana to provide for their families, pay their bills, and support local businesses. This project will enable these workers to be able to provide health insurance coverage for themselves and their families in addition to a living wage which will in turn support the small businesses within our communities and create thousands of spin- off jobs.  Montanans will once again be able to provide for their families and communities. Building this pipeline will pump over $420 million into my state's economy, including over $285 million into the wallets of working families throughout Montana. This will be a fundamental component in restoring what has been lost within our communities of the great state of Montana. The people opposing this pipeline don't understand the facts and they don't understand what it's like to go months without a job, not knowing how you are going to support your family.    Laborers Local 1686 agree that we need to deal with climate change and expand the use of renewable energy but the reality is, we still need oil. We need it from nations we can trust and we need jobs. Our members will even support a reasonable and concept to build the pipeline, create jobs here and reduce our dependence on oil from hostile regimes instead of caving to extremists.  The on ramp construction of Baker, Montana that is supported by our Governor Brian Sweitzer will allow 65 barrels of crude oil per day from the region to be transported efficiently at a reduced cost and this will result in $2 million annually to property tax revenue to Fallon County. Yet another example in long-term positive effect to Montana's working families. By building the pipeline Montanans and Americans will benefit. If we don't build the pipeline the oil will be shipped to China and no jobs will be created here. Do we help ourselves in Montana and the United States or do we help China?  We want to help ourselves. The pipeline will give the U.S. access to oil from one of our most trusted allies and reduce our dependence on oil from countries that wish to do us harm.  While the economic benefits are many, they would mean little if we do not do this pipeline safely. One of union's training priorities is to maintain pipeline safety by ensuring it provides a qualified workforce for operators and contractors to comply with federal pipeline safety regulations.  
MR. STEELE: Ms. Rickard I need to ask you to finish up. Thank you.  
MS. RICARD: Okay. Thank you very much for letting me speak on behalf of the laborers.    
MR. STEELE: Again I remind folks that if you have comments that you've already written out, you are very, very welcome to either bring them up to the table or to the table in the back of the room and they will be considered fully, so thank you. #51 I think Michael Klink has already spoken. If I am wrong then you are up. Are you Michael Klink?  
MR. MUFFETT: I am not Michael Klink but I am #51.  
MR. STEELE: That's interesting. Anyway will you please go ahead and state your name for the record please and your affiliation.  
MR. MUFFETT: My name is Carroll Muffett and I'm President of the Center for International Environmental Law. CL is a not for profit organization that uses the power of law to protect the environment, promote human rights, and ensure a just and sustainable society. I'm speaking on behalf of CL, Earth Justice and Green Peace. Under Executive Order 13337, the Secretary of State may not grant a presidential permit for the Keystone XL pipeline absent an express finding that the pipeline will serve the national interest. It will not.  Approval of the Keystone XL project would contribute to substantial increases in greenhouse gas emissions by both the United States and Canada with significant global climate impacts. As a result, it would violate our country's obligation to lead the international community in taking urgent action to mitigate climate change.  It would undermine key national policy priorities in transitioning to a clean energy economy. It would facilitate Canada's own violations of its international climate obligations and in doing so, approval of Keystone XL would exacerbate the real and very serious risks of climate change to national security and international peace.  Risks that the Secretary herself has recognized as a clear and present danger to the United States, the international community, and the world.  For these reasons, the State Department must find that the Keystone XL project does not serve the national interest.  The U.S. has made a clear commitment to the American public and the international community that it will lead in the global transition to a low carbon economy. However, if approved, Keystone XL will facilitate the extraction, production, and use of one of the world's most carbon-intensive fuels and undermine our commitment and our ability to show leadership on climate change. As a party to the UN Framework convention on Climate Change, the U.S. is obligated under Article IV.2 national policies and take measures that will demonstrate that it is taking the lead in addressing climate change consistent with the objective of the Convention.  As such, the U.S. must show progress towards achieving the Convention's ultimate objective of stabilizing greenhouse gas concentrations at a level that would prevent dangerous human interference with the climate.  For more than two decades, the U.S. has failed to deliver on that commitment in any meaningful way. Approval of Keystone XL would continue and compound that history of failure.  To date, this administration's professed commitments to meet international obligations and lead on climate change in various forums -- is that five minutes?  
MS. COLEMAN: Three.  
MR. MUFFETT: Thank you.    
MS. COLEMAN: Thank you very much.  
MR. STEELE: Thank you. I'd like to call please Mr. Brent Booker, I think it is.  
MR. BOOEKR: yes.  
MR. STEELE: Okay and after Mr. Booker we have Laura Hughes and Rachel Eggabo, who I thought spoke earlier.  
MS. COLEMAN: Yes.  
MR. STEELE: And Jack Reid please. Please go ahead Mr. Booker.  
MR. BOOKER: Brent Booker. I stand proudly here representing the 500,000 men and women of the Laborers International Union of North America to speak on behalf --    The State Department to issue the presidential permit because it is vital for our country's national security. It's vital for two reasons, first of which it will reduce our dependence on foreign oil but more importantly I'm here to talk about jobs. I'm talking about jobs for Americans and for Canadians that this project, the TransCanada is going to provide for Americans.  TransCanada partnered with the unions several years ago. They came to us because they knew that we were the best trained and had the best safety record of anybody building pipelines in the United States.  Amongst the four crafts, we have hundreds of training sites across the United States of America and Canada. We have dozens along the route of the pipeline. Hundreds of millions of dollars are spent on an annual basis between the Laborers, the United Association, the International Union of Operating Engineers, and the International Brotherhood of Teamsters. This money is used to train the workers who are going to build this pipeline who are going to build this pipeline safely and we are going to build this pipeline effectively. We commend the EPA, the State Department and more importantly TransCanada for partner with the unions and they're using their own vigorous safety standards that far exceed the regulations that have been put forth through the EPA and the State Department.  We feel that these hearings have been fair, we feel that these hearings have had an honest dialogue that allows both parties to put their issues forward but the bottom line is, Americans need jobs and TransCanada --    TransCanada is going to provide those jobs through the length and the construction of this project. In the last four years over 2 million Americans have lost their jobs in the construction industry. Construction unemployment is nearly twice as much as the national average which hovers around 9% currently. This project will put thousands of workers back to work and they'll do it quickly.  It's a shovel-ready project, it's going to allow our members who are currently unemployed, some of which might be a couple of weeks, more than likely months, and some possibly years, who have been trying to figure out how they're going to put the next meal on the table, how they're going to pay their mortgage, how they're going to pay their car payment.    These workers need this job. These workers need the Keystone XL to unlock these good jobs. TransCanada has committed to paying a fair living wage, to pay health benefits to the workers who are going to work on this pipeline and pay pensions so that when our workers retire they can retire with a fair living wage.  We implore you, we ask you, we need this job. Thank you for your consideration.    
MR. STEELE: Next I have Laura Hughes.  
MS. HUGHES: Hello again Mr. Steele. I saw you at Glendai. My name is Laura Hughes and I am the pipeline Representative for the Laborers International Union of North America.    I spent many years working on these projects, years that I might add provided me with a steady employment, with a living wage and decent benefits. Now I have the honor to represent these workers and today I speak on their behalf.  The workers that build these pipeline have steady careers in this industry and we build these lines according to the lead standards of construction. We are proud of the work we accomplish and we are not afraid to speak up if we see something that is improper. We produce a quality product because we live and work in the areas that these pipelines are built in.  Local residents will be employed on these projects along with experienced, industry proven American laborers that follow the industry. We provide the qualified, trained, and experienced labor that our international contractors need to have a quality result.  Currently, the construction industry suffers anywhere from 13 to 18 percent, depending on who you ask. Unemployment, more so in the rural areas where traditionally we lay these lines. These small communities that we enter and perform the work in gets a huge shot in the arm from us. We can turn a paycheck over in 24 hours, at the local grocery stores, gas stations, hotels, restaurants, and any other item one might need while living away from home.  The resulting economic impact invigorates the local community. Our contractors also believe in buying locally. When they need work supplies and many other things they will buy from the community, shovels, fencing materials, chain saws, water jugs, fuel, groceries, and the list goes on and on and on.  This is about jobs. Jobs that put American middle class back to work. The middle that is disappearing and shrinking that supports the tax base for all of the structured communities that need to survive.  This job is shovel-ready and we need these jobs. Where better to come from than our neighbor to the north and as an added bonus, Montana and North Dakota will have an on ramp to transport the Bakken shale field oil to market, making this an additional shot in the arm for those statewide governments.  We still are a fossil-fuel society but we can be environmentally correct society that enables this line to go through the complete process of two Environmental Impact Statements with the pipe being laid in the most environmentally stringent country in the world, by the best international, best practices contractors in the world, and the most qualified and trained employees available. We understand the need for renewable energy, we are not there now. We need to feed our families now. It's about jobs.    
MR. STEELE: Thank you very much. We would appreciate it if you would allow the speakers to go ahead and speak without interruption just because it takes additional time away from us. Mr.  Ried.  
MR. WHATLEY: My name is Michael Whatley, #54, and I am the Executive Vice President of Consumers Energy Alliance. CEA's made up of more than 300,000 individuals and over 165 organizations that represent every sector of the U.S. economy including truckers, farmers, highway users, shippers, manufacturers, iron steel producers, chemical manufacturers and energy producers.  CEA strongly support the Keystone XL pipeline because of the economic benefits that it will provide. Not only to the six states in the XL corridor, but for the national as a whole. The pipeline will create more than 120,000 jobs across the United States. Even more, this project will create hundreds of millions of dollars in government receipts, help balance the budget, and create $20 billion in economic growth nationwide. That's a lot of money that will go to improving our schools, our roads, and our hospitals.  The Keystone XL pipeline project will also strengthen our national energy security. The 700,000 barrels of oil per day that this pipeline will bring to Gulf Coast refineries will be coming from places like Oklahoma, Montana, the Dakotas, and Canada, our closest neighbor, ally, and largest trading partner.  This oil is not subject to violent revolutions like we've seen this year in Egypt and Libya. It cannot be used as a political tool like Russian oil can. It is highly discounted from the prices we pay for the Persian Gulf and it will help drive down fuel prices for both our military and American drivers.  There have been several allegations made by pipeline opponents that oil from the Keystone XL pipeline will be exported to Asia or will drive up gas and diesel prices. These claims could not be more unrealistic. As of this morning, the United States has imported 2.65 billion barrels of oil this year and according to EIA statistics at a total cost of $281 billion. To suggest that we will become an exporter because of this capacity or that adding 700,000 barrels of oil to U.S. markets will increase prices is completely unrealistic.  Further, there is already excess pipeline capacity to get crude oil from the Alberta oil sands formations to the Pacific Coast which is about a 500 mile journey. Suggesting that producers would send it 1,700 miles down to Port Arthur, load it on a tanker and then send it through the Panama Canal to get it to Pacific markets is ridiculous.  Not only will the pipeline bring great economic and energy security benefits to the United States, it will do so without harming our water or our environment. The State Department extensive environmental review of this pipeline concluded that there was no scenario in which the Northern High Plains Aquifer would be adversely affected.  The State Department also studied over a dozen other routes for the pipeline and found that the current route is the safest alternative and that other alternative routes would "disturb more land and cross more bodies of water than the proposed route."  Over 2,500 thousand miles of pipeline has already crossed the Ogallala Aquifer and Keystone XL will be built with state-of-the-art technology and pipeline are the safest most efficient way to transport oil.  To conclude, it is clear that it is in the national interest to allow construction of this important pipeline because it will be environmentally safe, because it will create thousands of high paying jobs, because it will significantly boost the U.S.  economy and enhance energy security, CEA request that on behalf of energy consumers nationwide the State Department and the Administration to grant the presidential permit and allow construction of the Keystone XL pipeline.    
MR. STEELE: Thank you. Mr. Reid.  
MR. SEWELL: Good afternoon. I appreciate Jack yielding his # to me. My name is Rodney Sewell and I am a member of Local Union 657 right here in Washington, DC.    And I am also the President here of Labor Union Local 657. I'm also a lay leader within my church where a lot of our union members, construction men and women, is out of work and the community which I live in, there is numerous denomination of churches and they look to us to provide jobs for those construction members that's within their church.  So we are reaching out to the community within our community to put people back to work and we need construction jobs like this Keystone pipeline so to put our members within our churches to work. Building the Keystone pipeline create thousands of good jobs here in America that will allow men and women to provide for their families, pay their bills and support local businesses.  This pipeline will create prevailing wages, health benefits, and the key thing to a lot of our construction workers is health benefit insurance for our members. To go without insurance, we know what it's like and this construction pipeline will give us those health benefits, those prevailing wages, and pension for our members.  These jobs are desperately needed.  America has lost over two million construction jobs in the last four years and more than one in seven construction workers can't find work. These are more than a job. These are careers for our union brothers and sisters. Thousands of jobs will be created if this pipeline goes through.  Building this pipeline would pump billions into our economy, much of that going directly into the wallets of working families, men and women. We agree that this pipeline need to be done safely, that's why we have those skilled men and women within those trades, the pipefitters, the teamsters, the laborers that can do this pipeline safely.  The people proposing this pipeline may not understand what it's like to go months without having job, feeding you family, putting food on the table, we know what it's like. I am a third generation pipeline worker, lived around the pipeline all my life, use that pipeline to put my kids through school, graduate, so I know what it is to be out of work.  So I'm saying to you, please let this pipeline go through so I can continue to provide for my family, put food on my table.    Also, the pipeline have ran through my family, right through their backyard within 100 yards, so we need this pipeline, we need this work, and I say we are definitely in support of this pipeline.    
MR. STEELE: Thank you. I would like to call please Michael Barrett, Michael Reeves, Phil Stevenson, and Greg Davis please.  
MR. BARRETT: I believe its afternoon, good afternoon. My name is Michael Barrett. Thank you for the opportunity to speak today. I stand before you as a representative of the Laborers International Union.    
MR. STEELE: Please, go ahead.  
MR. BARRETT: A union that's working for working families throughout this country and Canada as well, but I'm also a lifelong environmentalist and I take that seriously.  I have attended countless rallies, demonstrations, meetings over the years over environmental causes, including an early attempt to shut down Wall Street over its support for the nuclear power industry.  I understand that some environmental groups are opposed to the Keystone XL pipeline; I respect their passion and their fundamental concerns.  My union works with many of these groups to find common ground in creating sustainable good paying jobs. But their opposition to this pipeline is a mistake. This is not a question of whether Canada will extract its oil. This is a question about whether we're going to construct a pipeline to take that oil into the United States.  Opposing the pipeline will not reduce carbon fuel emissions, since this oil will simply be burned less cleanly in China, if we don't build this pipeline. Opposing this pipeline will not reduce oil spills since pipelines are much safer way to transport oil than the tankers which would carry this oil to China.  Environmental opposition to this pipeline is a knee-jerk reaction rather than a sound strategic position. You cannot reduce global warming by opposing this pipeline. On the other hand, this pipeline will generate jobs for thousands of unemployed construction workers that desperate need them, jobs that will support their families and their communities.  Make no mistake, unemployment kills.  Unemployment kills workers, it kills families, and it kills communities, and it's killing them right now.  This pipeline can and should be built safely and well. North America Union train construction workers are the best pipe layers in the world. We can and will build a safe pipeline.  We need to be rational about the trade- offs of a project like Keystone XL. We need to think about the alternatives if this project isn't built.  The reasonable thing is to build the pipeline, create jobs here and reduce our dependence on oil from other parts of the world. That's why the Final Environmental Impact Statement concludes that the alternatives to the pipeline are not reasonable or environmentally preferable.  Please find that the Keystone XL project is in the national interest and approve the presidential permit as soon as possible. Thank you for today's hearing and the opportunity to comment.    
MR. STEELE: Michael Reeves.  
MR. REEVES: Yes, Michael Reeves. I'm Michael Reeves, I'm President of the Ports to Plains Alliance, which is a grassroots organization of cities, counties, chamber of commerce, economic development organizations along a 2,300 mile corridor that runs from Mexico to Canada.  We have members in 10 U.S. states, Alberta and Saskatchewan, Canada, as well as Quella, Mexico and the Keystone XL pipeline is proposed to run through our region and it will have a direct impact on many of our members both positive and negative impacts that may occur.  And I encourage you to approve the presidential permit for the pipeline and I submitted a letter with the signatories of more than -- about 50 mayors and county officials joining on. Keystone XL provides significant economic benefits for our region and it is particularly important for America's Heartland that has continued to see population declines. The pipeline is projected to create more than 20,000 manufacturing and construction jobs on the pipeline itself and contribute more than $5.2 billion in tax revenue to the corridor states.  At a time when our state and local governments are facing budget cuts and therefore job cuts, these revenue and employment benefits are crucial. Most numbers don't include the number of jobs, American jobs, that are supported by production of Alberta oil, whether it's steel, drilling, oil field equipment manufacturers, trucking companies, and many other American industries that provide jobs for lots of Americans.  I had a trucking company called me a couple weeks ago looking for potential back haul because they're importing so much steel from Texas up to Alberta, that they are looking for more trip that way.  Keystone XL is a key component for American effort to end our dependence on Middle East and Venezuelan oil by increasing our access to supplies from our trusted neighbor and ally, Canada, as well as domestic supplies from the Bakkan formation in Montana and North Dakota.  Relying upon regimes that are in many cases unstable and unfriendly to the United States is simply bad energy, economic and national security policy. American troops are not called on to defend the oil fields of Alberta from the people in Saskatchewan.  We know that the money we spend in Canada will not get to fund insurgents or terrorists and when political uprisings and revolutions ousted governments in the Middle East earlier this year, we saw harmful oil price spikes that threaten our fragile economic recovery.  Today Alberta is sweating in new Premier and we see no impact on the oil markets at all. The pipeline will displace about half of the oil that the United States currently imports from the Middle East and by decreasing the U.S. reliance on Middle Eastern imports, we have a greater capacity to pursue a foreign policy that is not subjected to the whims of oil producers in the Persian Gulf. As the world's largest trading partners Canada and the United States have developed the infrastructure and policies necessary to ensure security and efficiency of exchange of goods and services. The relationship has led to strong political cooperation between these two western democracies and any scenario in which Canada would prohibit oil exports to the United States is highly unlikely.  Other nations have turned off the spigot to the U.S. and other countries in hostile moves that have caused significant damage to the U.S. economy and left our armed forces without reliable sources of fuel.  In the words of Energy Secretary Steven Chu, having Canada as a supplier of our oil is much more comforting than to have other countries supply our oil. Thank you very much.    
MS. COLEMAN: Thank you.  
MR. STEELE: Phil Stevenson.  
MR. STEVENSON: I'm Director of Pipeline for the United Association. You've heard a lot of testimony today regarding energy, energy independence, our allies, our trading partners -- how horrible is that? An export from the United States with American jobs. That's just horrible. I'm going to tell you the most important concern to us is economic impact.  At a time with high national unemployment, some areas of the industry is nearly 40%. I'm going to tell you, there is 13,000 jobs for construction.  We can argue about water, we can argue about the air, we can argue about the dirt --  
MR. STEELE: Can you please not react --  
MR. STEVENSON: I wish Dr. Skinner was still in here, I don't know if she is or not. The Cornell study that was put together, I don't know where they came up with their numbers. You can tell me a lot of things but you're not going to tell me about manning a pipeline job.    
MR. STEVENSON: There is 22 spreads, 22 spreads on this pipeline from the Canadian border to Port Arthur, Texas. Each individual spread will average between 750 to 1,000 employees. I assure you that is a true number. There is 30 pump stations between the Canadian border and Port Arthur, Texas.  Each one of those pump stations will employ 80 to 120 construction employees. These are real numbers.  
SPEAKER: He's lying through his teeth.  
MR. STEVENSON: Get a haircut.    
MR. STEELE: I would appreciate it -- excuse me Mr. Stevenson you'll get some more time added onto this, but I would appreciate it if those who are in the room would allow the speakers, every single speaker, whether you agree with his positions or not, to finish his remarks, treat that individual with respect and in return you will get the same treatment. Thank you. Mr. Stevenson please go ahead.    
MR. STEVENSON: Thank you. To my good friends from Nebraska, Boomer Slooner, if you are running those giant John Deere and Massey Ferguson tractors on water that you hand pumped out of the Ogallala Aquifer, and you're burning buffalo chips to run those tractors, God love you, but I think you're probably using thousands of gallons of diesel a year.  To the General that spoke earlier about transitioning to alternate forms, unless he knows something I don't know, as our good friend Bobby Petty puts so eloquently he's never seen a windmill on a fire plane or a solar panel on a submarine.  Please get this permit passed. Thank you.    
MR. STEELE: Greg Davis.  
MR. PERRYMAN: Are you to 57 yet?  
MR. STEELE: Excuse me.  
MR. PERRYMAN. I'm #57 Ray Perryman.  
MR. STEELE: What's your name?  
MR. PERRYMAN: Ray Perryman.  
MR. STEELE: I don't have you on this list.  
MR. PERRYMAN: I'm #57.  
MR. STEELE: Spell your name please.  
MR. PERRYMAN: Ray Perryman and I am an economist from Texas, former college professor and I'm the source of a lot of the numbers people have both praised and maligned here today. I'm the source of the 118,000 total jobs for the construction process, the 250,000 jobs once it's built, the 9.5 billion gross product and other things. And I just want to briefly talk about a few issues. Those numbers, I have files from written testimony that have all the numbers in them. I don't want to repeat those numbers, I would just briefly in response to what Dr. Skinner said earlier, we did not -- we were very careful. We do our analysis -- we've been doing this for 30 years.  We looked at every county, the number of workers in every county, where they would live, and that sort of thing in doing this analysis. We did not count the money that would be spent in Canada. We did not count the money that would be spent on pipes overseas. The bottom line is, there are billions of dollars that are going to be spent build this pipeline in the United States, it should be built safely, it should be built at the high standard.  You've got a lot of folks here in this room who know how to do that and it will generate substantial economic impact. It's impossible to spend billions of dollars on construction and not generate significant economic impact, you can't do it.  Beyond that, once the pipeline is built, I've heard several people say it will raise the price of oil and we analyze in the very careful highest economic standards using the best models available in the world, but the bottom line is, you can look at the first ten pages of any high school economics book and they will tell you when you got more supply the price goes down not up. And in this case, we're talking about supply coming from a politically stable neighbor as opposed to an alternative of it coming from an unstable region of the world.  People factor risk into price, they factor quantity into price, and all of those things say the price is going to go down. When that happens, all of the companies have to buy petroleum have additional money they don't have to spend on petroleum, they can spend on other things. They can invest, they can innovate, they can create jobs, they can do all the things that companies do. I am a very, very big fan of the environment; among the studies my company has done over the last 30 years they include the Apollo project which is a massive free energy investment, over billions of dollars investment in renewable energy.  I think we need all of that but its part of an overall portfolio of energy that we need and part of that energy is petroleum. We need it now, we have infrastructure issues, our infrastructure is out of date. This project both make sense from a construction standpoint, exactly what the stimulus package wants to do, except it doesn't require taxpayer money and it also creates jobs on a sustained basis because it's going to give us a more stable energy future.  So for all those reasons I would ask you to support the Keystone XL pipeline both from an environmental perspective and most importantly an economic perspective.  It really comes down to just plain common sense. Spending billions of dollars and lowering the price of oil is going to have a positive effect on the economy. I thank you very much for your time and attention.  
MR. STEELE: Is Greg Davis here? Okay, please.  
MR. DAVIS: My name is Greg Davis. I'm representing the Laborers International Union of North America.    After more than three years in the permitting process, it's critical that the State Department move forward and approve the Keystone XL project.  The construction industry needs this important investment, right now for our economy and the security of our country. The construction sector has had a depression-era unemployment levels. Where one million construction workers were unemployed during the peak week of the construction season this year. People are losing their houses, their cars, and their health insurance.  Times are tough right now for the U.S.  construction work. These are not short-term insignificant job for construction workers as some as referred to them. We survive in this industry.  We're stringing together jobs of much shorter duration on average to make our living and raise our families. In this industry, most workers do not make 2,000 hours a year. The construction worker averages about 1200 hours a year for his whole year.  We don't get to go to an office every day, we do not get to work in a controlled climate and air condition. We are subjected to wind and rain and all types of adverse weather conditions. We do not get paid when this happens. We only get paid for the hours we actually work and many of us haven't seen work in months and some people, years.  These jobs are needed and the jobs are needed now.    It's time to move this project forward.  We need to see the economic benefits of this project for our communities and the construction industry.  The project will employ thousands of construction workers. It will provide wages for them to rebuild their lives, make their car payments, buy groceries, pay mortgages, taxes, and create revenue to revive our communities.  As a veteran of the U.S. armed forces and a proud parent of a child serving in the National Guard, the enhancement of our national security is of great concern to me and my family.  The United States import millions of gallons of crude per day. America is a consumer of energy and we are going to need all the energy resources we have. Building the Keystone XL pipeline should not show down resource in the battery technology or slow the expansion of wind farm or solar energy. Our reliance on foreign sources of oil makes our economic and energy security vulnerable.  There are governments who control oil supply whose philosophies are at odds with the interest of the United States. Energy independence will reduce their potential to threaten the U.S.  economy and will provide our military with the better ability to protect our country.  Until a day when our soldiers can go into battle, and tanks and humvees that run on just batteries and solar power, our country will need oil.  For these reasons, the Keystone XL project and approval of the presidential permit are in the best economic and national interest of the United States.  Thank you.    
MR. STEELE: Next I have please, Liz Barratt-Brown, Tim Guttera, Brenda Kenny, and Drew Veysey, please.  
MS. BARRATT-BROWN: Thank you. My name is Liz Barratt-Brown. I am a Senior Attorney with the NRDC. And I'd like to cede a few seconds of my time to Kathryn Solorzano-Lowell.  
MS. SOLORZANO-LOWELL: Hello, my name is Kathryn Solorzano-Lowell. I am coming down here in support of tar sands actions and Boston tar sands action patriots and I am currently seeking employment.  Now I just spent about 10 hours in line on that marble floor with social justice and environmental justice advocates that support union rights and with union advocates that support green energy, and all of them were in support -- all the ones that I spoke to -- of the Occupy Wall Street movement and the Occupy movements across this country.    The only reason that we are all here is because other infrastructure projects have been stifled and these people need jobs, but the pipeline is not the answer because they need more jobs than that.    We need to support each other and I'm just going to throw out and like many have said, I don't know the exact numbers on this, but if the top 1% were paying what our union friends are paying for taxes, I think that would be a pretty good start.  Thank you very much.    
MS. BARRATT-BROWN: When President Obama was elected, he promised in his own words to end the tyranny of oil. In a speech last March the President said, "The United Stats of American cannot afford to bet our long-term prosperity, our long-term security on a resource that will eventually run out, and even before it runs out, will get more and more expensive to extract from the ground.  We can't afford it when the cost to our economy, our country and our planet are so high. The only way for America's energy supply to be truly secure, is by permanently reducing our dependence on oil." And he finished, "we've got to do it quickly."  Approval of the Keystone XL pipeline would take the country in the opposite direction by increasing our dependency on oil. That's why you've heard from team leaders like General Anderson today that are speaking out against this pipeline. They understand it will lock us into 50 years or more of the dirtiest oil on the planet. The fact is, U.S. oil consumption is in decline. That trend is expected to continue as our auto and truck efficiency increases. The U.S. already has two million barrels a day of tar sands pipeline capacity but imports only a million. This pipeline is not needed. So why the big push? What the oil industry really wants is to get tar sands bitumen out of the Midwest where there is a glut and to the Gulf Coast where the is more refining capacity for dirty crude and it can command higher prices.  According to TransCanada own testimony there is $4 billion more a year in profits to the tar sands industry.  
MR. STEELE: Can you go ahead and finish please.  
MS. BARRATT-BROWN: If it can move the oil to the Gulf, coming mainly out of the pocket of Midwesterners. There are much better jobs and better future and clean energy. On behalf of our millions of activists and members, we ask you do not find this pipeline in our national interest. I am submitting for the record letters, resolutions, statements and testimony asking that this pipeline be denied. The risks are too great. Thank you very much.    
MR. STEELE: Thank you. Please could we allow the next speakers. I have next on my list, I have Tim Guttera.    
MR. STEELE: Tim is not here. How about Brenda Kenny.  
MS. KENNY: Thank you ladies and gentlemen. My name is Dr. Brenda Kenny and I am President of the Canadian Energy Pipeline Association. This is an Association that represents the major pipeline transmission companies in Canada.  You're faced with a very important decision for your great nation and I hope that I can provide a few points of clarification and information to assist.  Collectively, the companies I represent operate more than 60,000 miles of pipeline throughout North America. These pipelines are critical energy highways that connect oil and gas producing regions to consumers.  The Keystone XL project is just one link in an ongoing improvement of infrastructure in North America that began decades ago.  In keeping with our industry's steadfast commitment to safety and continuous improvement, this project will be using the best available technology and adopt the most stringent safety procedures to ensure safe and reliable transport to the refineries in Texas that can assist your markets in the South of the U.S.  There has been some allegations that this pipeline has had a number of leaks. The pipeline itself has had no leaks. There have been 14 minor leaks within station property that have not affected any private landowners and all of that has been cleaned up, and I would wager that the total volume has likely been less than any of us in this room might have spilled through one year of filling our own vehicles. At the time of significant political upheavals internationally and a very difficult economic recovery here in North America, this pipeline project offers a number of key benefits that I would like to point out. First of all is the long-term access to reliable source of energy that is being developed in an environmentally responsible manner. The second is short-term economic benefits through construction jobs and the purchase of local goods where American markets and businesses can capitalize on this great opportunity.  The third is long-term tax revenue for states and dozens of counties whether they choose to invest in schools, healthcare, road refurbishments or what have you. At this time of incredible economic volatility where markets have difficulty making long- term investment decisions, this project offers a welcome relief.  Projects such as Keystone XL are long-term assets in the public interest because they meet the energy needs of your nation and the capacity of this particular project only represents about 4.5% of your overall U.S. demand.  It's an important incremental part for reliable energy, creating choice, but in this context, this in no way is a lynch-pin to continued fossil fuel reliance. Indeed this is a transition to better supply connections and security as the U.S. makes its own choices in the future about the evolution of its energy use. Thank you very much.    
MR. STEELE: Drew Vesey please.  
MR. VEYSEY: So my name is Drew Veysey and as a proud Canadian American I will say that the Keystone XL pipeline is not in the national interest of the United Stats of America. We need a 21st century economy in this country that's not shackled to dirty fossil fuel. There will be thousands of additional miles of steel chaining our country to an antiquated fossil fuel economy if we build the Keystone XL pipeline. We have to choose. We have to choose between a clean energy economy or dirty economy and we've had all of the above energy policy for the past 30 years and that is an obvious failure.  As part of the 99% of Americans, the common, decent people of this country, we must resist further expansion of the fossil fuel economy. The richest 1% can cope with climate change by buying themselves safety. It is the 99% who suffer from the deadly and damaging effects of climate change.    That is why I urge you to deny the Keystone XL pipeline permit. If this government still works in the best interest of the American people, you will deny this pipeline. Thank you.    
MS. COLEMAN: Thank you. We are going to call the next series of numbers, however, I do want to tell you that our time has passed very quickly.  There were many, many people who signed up. We were going to end at 2:00, we'll go a little bit to 2:15 because we had our introductory statement but we do need to bring our meeting to an end at 2:15.  So if those we call could speak as effectively and efficiently as possible, we'll try to get as many of them before 2:15. Thank you. #64 Michael, it looks like Whatling, #65 Quinten James, #66 Gloria Leal, #67 Danny Morgan. Thank you.  
MR. MOSKOWITZ: I am taking spot #64 for Michael Whatling. My name is Richard Moskowitz. I am the Vice President of the American Trucking Association.  No matter what side of this debate you are on, trucking is essential to your way of life. The food that you eat the clothes that you are wearing, the medicines that heal your family, are all brought to you by the truck and the importance of fuel to the trucking industry in the U.S. economy cannot be overstated. The trucking industry burns 35 billion gallons of diesel fuel and 14 billion gallons of gasoline to deliver life's essentials. Fuel is our second largest expense. In 2008 when oil hit $148 per barrel, 3,000 trucking companies went bankrupt.  Over 140,000 trucks and even more jobs were lost.  Now the trucking industry believes in alternatives. We're looking at biofuels, we're looking at natural gas, we're looking at electrification, but each of these alternatives has challenges associated with its use in the trucking industry. They're just not quite ready to flip the switch and get completely off of fossil fuels.  So we encourage research to overcome these challenges, but we're faced with the reality that for the foreseeable future, we're going to continue to depend on fossil fuels to deliver life's essentials.  Let me turn to energy security. We import 51% of the crude oil in this country from foreign sources. If we turn our backs on Canadian oil, we're still going to demand the same amount of fuel. The only difference is we're going to have to get it from elsewhere, from less secure places of the globe and that's going to adversely impact our energy security.  The ongoing crisis in the Middle East should serve as a wake-up call on the need to improve our domestic energy security and the Keystone XL pipeline is a critical component of that infrastructure to improve our energy security.  I want to address environmental concerns briefly. The trucking industry believes in environmental stewardship. We have a robust sustainability plan which we go into more detail in our written comments and I encourage you to read them.  We understand that one of the primary objections to the Keystone pipeline is carbon emissions and I find that very strange because I think there is a carbon paradox going on here. If we do not build the Keystone pipeline, we're actually going to increase global climate emissions and here is why.  Canada is sitting on $17 trillion worth of oil. They're going to develop that oil whether we build this pipeline or not. The only difference is, if we build that pipeline, the oil comes to the United States and it comes to the United States in a way that has less carbon emissions associated with it. If we don't build this pipeline, it goes to Vancouver by train or by truck and as much as I'd like to see it go by truck, the fact of the matter is that there are more carbon emissions associated with those other modes of transportation than there are with pipelines. I see that my time is up. Thank you for the opportunity to testify.    
MS. COLEMAN: I appreciate it. Thank you.  Yes.  
MR. JAMES: Thank you. Good afternoon.  My name is Quinten James and I am the National Director for the Sierra Student Coalition, the youth arm of the Sierra Club and I am proud to join and represent the over 40,000 members and supporters of the Sierra Student Coalition when I say that we are proudly opposed to the Keystone XL pipeline.    I am also happy to stand here today and join the National Farmers Union, the Transit Workers Union and the Amalgamated Transit Union and various other mayors, scientists and Nobel Peace laureates when I say that we are again opposed to the Keystone XL pipeline.    I am here to submit testimony based on three key points. The Keystone XL pipeline is not the answer for American jobs. The Keystone XL pipeline will not create energy security for the United States and any life lost to the oil industry is one life too many.  To my first point, the Keystone XL pipeline will, according to the Cornell University Global Labor Institute, only create around 6,000 jobs. So the claims by TransCanada and the oil industry cannot be substantiated. It's easier to hire a scientist and tell them to get up and ramble on about facts that you create, but these jobs cannot be substantiated by real studies.  Based on the study, Cornell found that barely 6,000 jobs will be created and although any job is better than no jobs, none of us are against jobs. The reality is, the State Department in its own study, found that this jobs will be non-local and temporary jobs. I'll say that again very briefly, the State Department in its own study has found that these jobs that the pipeline will create will be non- local, temporary jobs.    Thank you. The other reality that we know is that the very materials that this pipeline will be made of are not even from this country. They're imported from Italy and China. So thousands of American jobs could have been created if TransCanada decided to use American products and American workers, but we know they only care about profits before people.    On to my second point. The Keystone XL pipeline will not create energy security for the United States. The only way to create energy security for the Untied States is to reduce the demand for oil and as the largest consumer for oil, what we do impact the entire world. We know that to this day, two million jobs have been created by the clean energy economy and if we invest in the clean energy economy we can create two million more jobs. And so the answer is not to permit this pipeline to be created for our security, but it's actually to invest and reduce our demand on oil.  And so lastly I want to tell a story about Shane Roscoe. Shane, if he was here with us today he would be 23 years old. Shane was a father, a son, a husband, and a hard working American. But you see, Shane woke up one day, just like every other workday, he went to go work for the oil industry up the coast of Louisiana but last year Shane lost his life because so many people said that his at work was safe.  So many people said his place of work was a place where he could make a living and support his family, but today we know that Shane lost his life because of BP, because our government said that these places are not safe.  And so I urge you to think about people, real people that go to work everyday and who demand more from us that if we would invest or permit a pipeline that we would ensure that pipeline was safe.  Thank you very much.    
MS. COLEMAN: Thank you.  
MS. LEAL: Good afternoon. My name is Gloria Leal. I'm an attorney and consultant. I reside in Austin, Texas and it's my pleasure to be here today. Thank you for the opportunity.  I traveled from Texas because I thought it was very important to tell you a little bit about my client and who we represent.  We support the granting of the presidential permit in support of the pipeline. I represent the Texas Alliance of Energy Producers.  It's a Texas oil and gas association, composed of over 3,000 members of independent producers in the state. Our members are small producers with fewer than 10 employees but we do have about 5% that are public corporations. We drill approximately over 90% of the wells in Texas and the United States.  We do not represent pipelines marketers, retailers, or major integrated companies, which is mostly -- and we do not represent big oil, although we do support the building and the granting of the permit, with them, on this issue. Pipelines are essential to our members and the operations of the domestic oil and gas industry.  Pipelines are the purchasers, the shipper, the transporter of our products, crude oil and natural gas. Our producers explore and drill with their own monies. Pipelines are integral part of the operations that allow my client, independent producers, access to the market and to make sure that those products are delivered to the consumers.  The Texas Alliance of Energy Producers supports the pipelines. We support the creating of jobs. We'll take those jobs, 300, 500, 3,000, 5,000, 10,000, we'll take them in Texas, okay. We support our neighbor to the north, Canada, which is a stable neighbor.  We prefer that -- the oil and gas is going to be developed, we prefer that it come to Texas via pipeline than go somewhere else. No one has talked about the environmental factor of the oil waterborne barrels and barges that would be produced if there is a pipeline as opposed to coming through the Gulf Coast.  Transportation by land -- by pipeline is safer than waterborne barrels on barges and tankers. We also appreciate that the TransCanada Pipeline has agreed that initial construction of the pipeline, if you look at that map, would be the section of the line from Cushing, south to Port Arthur, Texas, already started. Cushing is full and more is being built. It is imperative that that bottleneck at Cushing be relieved prior to the shipping of Canadian crude oil into an already saturated market. The discounted price of West Texas intermediate versus Brent North Sea is evident that domestic, independent have been and would be adversely affected if this is not the case.  On a personal note, I am a Tanana from South Texas, fifth generation. My father was a veteran, three of my brothers were in the service, my cousins are in Afghanistan and Iraq, my brother is there. I do not want my brothers and sisters, cousins, uncles, friends, Texans, American boys to go to Iraq and Afghanistan. I support the building of the pipeline from Canada to Texas. Thank you very much.  
MS. COLEMAN: Thank you.    
MS. COLEMAN: Yes, Mr. Morgan.  
MR. MORGAN: My name is Danny Morgan. I currently serve in the Oklahoma House of Representatives. I represent District 32, which also takes in much of the area in Cushing, Oklahoma, which is the crossroads of the pipelines in the world.  More pipelines cross the Cushing, Oklahoma than anywhere else in the world and I would challenge any of you to find a story of any pipeline accident or catastrophe that has happened at that junction of our pipelines across the country.  I'm here to tell you that that construction will include jobs. The reason I know it's going to include jobs is because I've personally seen it. I can take you to the families of those who are working there that not only work to build the pipeline, but are still there in the maintenance and operations of those pipelines.  But what I don't understand and listening to what I've heard today, and I thank the State Department for having the opportunity for us to have a good vetting of this issue, is the fact that we don't believe for some reason that all of these energy sources can live together.  I would invite you to come to the State of Oklahoma because the largest increase in jobs we've seen in the energy sector is in the wind industry.    We're building wind turbines. We're seeing those trucks, we're seeing those electrical engineers and the labor force of our labor unions working to build those towers. And those are "temporary jobs" that I've heard so much about.  Same way with this pipeline. This is an opportunity for us to continue to blend a good mixture for the energy needs of this country.  But why in the world would we say no? Why would we say no to billions of dollars of investment coming to this country? These aren't our dollars.  These aren't our tax dollars. These are foreign country, Canada, saying I want to make an investment in your country. Why would we say no? why would we say no to the job opportunities that we see?  It's like us in Oklahoma saying no to the wind industry, we don't want your money. It's a great segment of our economy and we seen the increase. I can tell you, I'm already beginning to see the rail pickup in our communities from those products coming in from the wind industry. And I will tell you today that you will continue to see rail pick up in our state because of the pipe that's coming.  You'll continue to see an increase in the construction workers with backhoes, dossiers. The beauty of moving that oil is that we take it off of the infrastructure. That oil is going to move and it's going to move into this country.  Do we want to put it on the roads and highways or do we want to put it in a safe pipeline that's proven itself year over and year after year.  I would rather move it from the pipeline than continue to damage the infrastructure of this country.  Lastly I want to say this, the good thing about a pipeline as well as other forms of energy, including wind energy, is the excise tax that's paid to the local schools, and the local counties, and the local cities. That money stays there for ever. That excise tax that's paid on that pipe, stays in those educational institutions as long as that steel is in the ground and it will be a tremendous boost to our educational institutions in our state and all the states along the route. Thank you for the opportunity.    
MS. COLEMAN: Thank you very much. #68 please, Daniel Gallagher, #69, Albert Gonzalez, #70 Jerry Miller.  
MR. GALLAGHER: Hello. My name is Daniel Gallagher. I am the Green Party Chairman of Lancaster counties Green Party. I represent 900 of so of those greens in the county but also can speak for 1,000 in the State of Pennsylvania and tens of thousands in the country. And I would say unequivocally this is -- all of these people of the Greens would deny this -- would like to ask that the panel deny the permit.  One of the advantages of going last is actually to see the interaction in the room and I think as prepared statements that others have addressed very long, so I'll try to cut mine down to really just an observation, and that is, we have what I think is a manufactured conflict in this room.    We have a conflict that corporations somewhat in cahoots with our government, has said, you know, let's get the people who are really working and doing a great job for our country and our labor unions against the people who are really thinking about our environment or thinking about sustainability. And we really are the same people.    We are the same people and once we realize that and once we can work together, I think we come out of this ahead of the game. So really my advice -- I kind of had two pieces of advice that I thought for really the labor side and then environmental side.  On the labor side really I thought we should consider and they need to consider a little bit more of the sources, you know, where is your information coming from. Don't accept the claims made to you just because they sound good. On the other side, the environmentalists tend to think we're always right. So we have to accept that sometimes we are wrong, sometimes there are situations and environments where people need a job. We all need a job. So this is really a manufactured conflict From there, I think others have stated the points very well. I think there is a term that I have come across recently that expresses this concept a little bit that I haven't heard yet today, and that's corporate socialism. And I think really, this pipeline is supporting corporate socialism where the corporations are able to privatize the profits, they're able to take something that should really be a common good, which is oil, and take that for their private profit and then have the cost of that activity, namely pollution, climate change, local health effects, be borne by those citizens in those areas.  So we have privatized profits, corporate costs, and I don't think that's a good situation.  Thank you very much.    
MS. COLEMAN: Thank you very much. Mr.  Gonzalez.  
MR. GONZALES: My name is Albert Gonzales.  I am the National Commander of the American GI Forum, a congressionally chartered veteran's organization and a lot of people have stood up here and thanked the panel for allowing them to speak, I would like to try to change that a little bit and thank the men and women that wore the uniform that allowed democracy to actually work.    We have individuals on both sides of the issue to be able to come and express their opinion.  Will we ever be able to reach unified opinion? Maybe never. But I would ask you to go back maybe 10/15 years to China when they were building the dams on the river there. Did they have an opportunity to have public access to our government officials to oppose their views or give their opposition? I don't think so, because of the fact of the men and women who wore the uniform that gives us this great democracy.  So I want to thank those men and women, not only those that serve but those that are serving today and putting themselves into harm's way.    I'm not going to argue with the General, but I still think energy is vital to the country's defense and it is an important part of this diverse national economy.  Our continued dependence on oil from Venezuela and the Middle East has increased energy cost and volatility, contributing to high prices at the fuel pumps.  The U.S. Department of Energy, another one of our government agencies, the people who to argue with that these numbers aren't correct, estimates that the North American oil Keystone XL delivers will allow us to reduce imports from these regions by up to 40%. I see my sign is almost up.  Let me just say, our nation's veterans deserve nothing less than good jobs and good business opportunities and they are now at a disadvantage that Keystone XL will help solve. Unemployment rates for young veterans are substantially higher than those of the general population. Keystone XL will provide sufficient short, long-term jobs and other economic opportunities for those who have put their lives on the line, as well as the Americans in general.  Do we understand the State Department's basis for the decision is whether the pipeline is of national interest, I say it's also national security.  Clearly it is reducing dependency on oil from volatile regions that do not share our values, increasing energy, national security, and launching a shovel-ready jobs machine will provide plenty of jobs for our young men and women that are returning from harms way.    
MS. COLEMAN: Thank you very much. #70, yes, please.  
MR. MILLER: Jerry Lee Miller. I am from Lancaster, Pennsylvania. Love. It's a four letter word. I hope you're okay with my using it here.  Like many of you I have been taught to love my neighbors as myself.  In 30 years as a pastor, I made the principal of neighbor love the core, the heart of my ethical message. I don't know if you've considered love as the basis for our national interest, but if you would consider it for just a moment, I'm sure you will be persuaded.  In my ministry I've visited thousands of hospital rooms where hurting people went for treatment, people like you and me, subject to bodily breakdown due to a host of causes known and unknown. I've also conducted hundreds of funerals for people whose earthly lives ended as all human live does, and each here someday will. I've seen each illness, each injury, and each death impacts other people, those whom afflicted people live and those who love them.  You and I suffer as individuals but our suffering causes others to suffer as well and it's good that we are connected in this way. Because we are connected, we don't want to inflict unnecessary suffering on others. we also realize it is undesirable for some of us to profit at the expense of others' suffering.  This brand of profiteering is opposite of neighbor love. We all agree that it is plain wrong. Love says this is injustice.  I'm sure you know about the immense amount of money a few corporations and investors stand to make from this pipeline. So do the citizens currently occupying Wall Street, Freedom Plaza here in DC, and a host of other U.S. locations. They're out in the streets crying for justice and seeking a country governed by neighbor love rather than money love.    Love says people over profits. I'm sure you know about the suffering of indigenous peoples in Alberta who've seen rare deadly diseases skyrocket since the tar sands began their costly, toxic extraction process. Love says, no more poisoning innocent people.    I'm sure you know the acceleration of climate change from tar sands oil used to wreak untold suffering upon the people of our nation perhaps even your own loved ones and mine. The number of billion-dollar weather disasters in the U.S. this year such as flooding, fires, and tornadoes are unprecedented and this trend will likely grow worse. Love says stop climate change while you can.    The likelihood of BP-type spills from ruptured pipelines over the nation's heartland threatens the fresh water drinking supply for 20 million people. Love says find a better way.    
MS. COLEMAN: Thank you. We can have one more speaker. #71 Susan Casey Lefkowitz  
MR. SWIFT: Susan Casey Lefkowitz ceded her time to me. My name is Anthony Swift. I'm a Policy Analyst with the Natural Resources Defense Council. I am from a fourth generation family in the oil business from West Texas and I know I speak for that family when I say, when presented the choice between safety and saving money, safety always comes first.  However, when presented with that same choice it appears TransCanada has consistently chosen to save money. President Obama told the American people that his administration would do the necessary science to ensure that Keystone XL would be operated safely. His administration has not yet followed up on that promise. Early in its assessment of Keystone XL, the State Department promised Congress that its environmental review would include a study of pipeline safety by regulators at the Department of Transportation. No such study has ever been done.  TransCanada claims in a set of 57 conditions will address the safety risk posed by Keystone XL. However, a close analysis of those conditions shows that all but 12 simply reiterate safety standards that are already required.  Moreover, recently released emails between TransCanada and the State Department confirm that these conditions are meant only to support a special permit that would allow Keystone XL to operate at higher pressures than minimum safety standards allow.  TransCanada agreed to a similar set of conditions for its high pressure Keystone I pipeline, describing the pipeline system as one that would meet or exceed world class safety and environmental standards.  In just its first year of operation, TransCanada's Keystone I pipeline had 14 leaks in the United States, spilling nearly 22,000 gallons.  Earlier speaker wagered that that was less than we all spill filling our cars in a year. I think everyone in this room would take that wager.    The nation's first major tar sands spill in Kalamazoo, Michigan has demonstrated that tar sands spills present significant new challenges. In addition to the potential of increased spill frequency, an assessment of the its physical properties indicate that it will behave differently from conventional crude when spilled. Recent experience with Enbridge's diluted bitumen spill in Kalamazoo, Michigan show that cleaning these spills present significant new challenges that have not yet been surmounted. After Enbridge spelled approximately 966,000 gallons of tar ands crude into the Kalamazoo watershed in July 2010, the Environmental Protection Agency originally set a two-month deadline for completing that clean-up.  Fourteen months later, Enbridge ha missed its second deadline.  
MS. COLEMAN: Sir, I was just going to ask you if you could kind of say the final sentence please.  
MR. SWIFT: Certainly. The Obama administration is not done the science to evaluate the risk these pipelines pose and moving forward on Keystone XL without more due diligence, puts the communities, water, and environmental resources of the United States at unnecessary risk.    
MS. COLEMAN: Thank you. Ladies and gentlemen, we regret that the time was passed so quickly and we haven't had a chance to hear from all of you, so we want to reiterate that we welcome your comments and you've got your forms, fax, and at the back table they will accept them and tell you how else to do it.  And I just also want to say for myself that it was a privilege to be here and hear all of these opinions and done in a very respectful and excellent way and its great example of American democracy. Thank you very much.   