Dear Secretary Clinton:

On behalf of our millions of members and supporters, we write to
you with concerns regarding TransCanada's proposed Keystone XL tar
sands pipeline. The Keystone XL tar sands pipeline should not be
built because it will facilitate expansion of the environmentally
destructive tar sands oil and lock America into a continued dependence
on this high‐carbon fuel in direct conflict with the Administration's
stated goals of building a clean energy economy and confronting climate
change. We ask that you ensure that the full scope of environmental
impacts, including the greenhouse gas emissions impacts, of tar
sands oil expansion are taken into account in the assessment of this
pipeline. The CEQ draft NEPA Guidance on Consideration of the Effects
of Climate Change and Greenhouse Gas Emissions has been referred to in
the April 16 Department of State draft environmental impact statement
(DEIS) on the Keystone XL trans‐boundary tar sands pipeline. However,
the draft guidance is currently going through its public comment
period and it is important that the final guidance is applied to
projects with high greenhouse gas emissions such as the Keystone XL
tar sands pipeline. The current discussion of global warming issues in
the DEIS is inadequate and the DEIS conclusion that there are minimal
greenhouse gas emissions associated from the project is spurious,
largely because of the lack of a life‐cycle analysis. Putting the
DEIS on hold until the new guidance is in place and can be applied will
help ensure appropriate consideration of the greenhouse gas emissions
effects of the project. To assist with this, we are also asking EPA
to complete a comprehensive life‐cycle assessment of greenhouse gas
emissions for tar sands oil to help inform the DEIS for this pipeline.

We will be preparing detailed comments on the DEIS, but initially, we
would like to ask you to do the following:  

• The State Department
should work closely with the White House Council on Environmental
Quality (CEQ) to coordinate a high level, transparent inter‐agency
process for assessing the full scope of environmental and social
impacts of and national interest in the Keystone XL pipeline.

• The State Department should suspend the permitting process for the
Keystone XL pipeline until CEQ's draft National Environmental Policy
Act (NEPA) Guidance on Consideration of the Effects of Climate Change
and Greenhouse Gas Emissions is complete and has been applied to the
pipeline assessment.

• The State Department should suspend the permitting process for the
Keystone XL pipeline until an Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)
greenhouse gas life‐cycle assessment for tar sands and emissions
increase in the U.S. transportation sector is completed and can be
integrated into the DEIS.

The Keystone XL pipeline will carry up to 900,000 barrels per day
of tar sands oil from Alberta, Canada to refineries on the U.S. Gulf
Coast.
 It would be the third and largest recent pipeline
delivering this highly carbon‐intensive fuel from Canada, more than
tripling U.S. imports of tar sands oil. To be filled, the pipeline
will require expansion of tar sands oil production. Thus, it is
important to assess not only existing greenhouse gas emissions, but
projections of what the expansion of tar sands oil operations would
mean in terms of all greenhouse gas emissions including those from
land use change in the Boreal forest and wetlands carbon reservoir.
 Additionally, it is critical to remember
the impacts expanded tar sands use will have on the people working
and living in and around the mining operations and refineries.
First Nations communities living downstream from the tar sands have
reported polluted water and wildlife and distressingly high rates
of cancer. Tar sands also create environmental justice issues in
the U.S. because the heavier oil leads to higher levels of refining
pollution that are typically born by lower‐income communities
working and living near the tar sands refineries.

Increasing our nation's reliance on tar sands oil will undercut
initiatives to stop global warming and create the green energy and
green jobs we need. If we increase our tar sands imports to 3 million
barrels per day this would increase the carbon in our fuel supply by
at least 3%. Such an increase in tar sands oil imports would undermine
the administration's initiatives to reduce greenhouse gas emissions,
such as increased CAFE standards. Tar sands directly compete with
homegrown jobs in clean energy, perpetuating a reliance on antiquated,
dirty fossil energy, and postponing our transition to an independent
energy sector. We ask that you ensure that the best information is
developed and included concerning tar sands oil life‐cycle greenhouse
gas emissions and the other environmental and public health impacts
of this tar sands oil pipeline before the permitting process moves
forward any farther.