Dear Speaker Pelosi and Chairman Markey,

On behalf of our millions of members and supporters, we want to thank
you for all your efforts to champion renewable energy and transition
the United States to a clean energy future.

We understand that you will be visiting Ottawa this week, and that
the topic of energy and climate change will be among the matters
discussed informally during your visit.

As you prepare for your visit, the undersigned groups from both Canada
and the United States would like to highlight our concern with the
very serious consequences of reliance on Canadian tar sands oil. Such
reliance is an obstacle to developing clean and sustainable energy
systems in our countries. Our groups are particularly concerned with
the proposal by the Canadian company TransCanada to build the Keystone
XL tar sands oil pipeline from Alberta to Texas. We are opposed to
the building of this pipeline, as it would lock us into decades of
consumption of one of the most environmentally destructive forms of
oil in the world and would undermine the U.S. transition to a new
energy economy.

The process for extracting and upgrading bitumen from the tar sands
generates over three times as much greenhouse gas pollution as the
production of conventional oil. On a well to wheels basis, that
translates into a 10-30% increase in greenhouse gas emissions per
barrel. To date, Canada has presented no action plan to achieve its
internationally agreed upon emissions reductions. Tar sands oil is
the fastest growing source of greenhouse gases (GHGs) in Canada and a
primary r production depletes fresh water in Alberta, destroys boreal
forests and wetlands, and threatens millions of migratory birds. A
recent scientific study confirmed that tar sands development is
polluting the Athabasca River watershed. First Nation communities
downstream of tar sands development are concerned about unusually
high rates of cancer and the violation of land and treaty rights.

Currently, the tar sands industry plans a massive expansion. The
Keystone XL pipeline would hasten that expansion, which is incompatible
with strong action on climate change. In light of this, 251 business
leaders have written to Secretary of State Hillary Clinton that we
question whether it is in the national economic interest to diverge
off the path toward

Our organizations also believe strongly that the energy security
benefits of tar sands oil have been exaggerated. Tar sands oil does
not undermine the power of OPEC, does not provide spare capacity in
times of shortage due to natural disasters or armed conflict, and

**9/8/2010** does not lower prices (in fact, it is the most expensive
oil in the world). Keystone XL and the associated increase in tar
sands production would be both a cause and a symptom of a failure to
address climate change and to reduce oil consumption. These failures
would make us less secure, as they would lead to conflict and economic
risk. The good news is that, as you know, U.S. oil demand is falling in
part due to policies that have increased fuel efficiency. According to
the U.S. EPA, there are nearly 7 million barrels of a day (more than
a third of current consumption) that could be saved using technology
available today. As long term oil demand in the U.S. decreases, there
will be no need to increase the supply of the dirtiest oil. With your
help as clean energy champions, we can meet our transportation energy
demands without furthering development of the most destructive oil
in the world. Again, our groups offer our support in your work to
promote clean, renewable energy that creates a healthy future for
North American families, and we look forward to continuing our work
with you to avoid any expanded reliance on destructive, toxic fuels
like tar sands. Sincerely,