Dear Secretary Clinton:

On behalf of our millions of members and supporters, particularly those whose land and
livelihood are located along the proposed pipeline right-of-way, we write to you to formally
request that the Department of State issue a Supplemental Environmental Impact Statement
(SEIS) for the Keystone XL project and provide a sufficient period of time for public review.
The public and cooperating agencies deserve the opportunity to review and comment on the
myriad impacts of this massive energy infrastructure project that were left unaddressed in the
Draft EIS before the Department finalizes the EIS.

The deficiencies in the Draft EIS have been publicly highlighted by the Environmental
Protection Agency, the Department of Energy, the Department of Interior, and numerous U.S.
Senators and Representatives. Among these were the inadequate assessments of the need for the
project, its impact on other energy supply options, the frequency and impact of diluted bitumen
pipeline spills, and its route through one of America’s most important natural resources, the
Ogallala Aquifer. Other inadequacies of the document include a lack of consideration of the
project’s potential impacts on trans-boundary greenhouse gas emissions, spill response, and air
quality in the communities surrounding the refineries that the pipeline would service. Chairman
Waxman, Senator Johanns, and the EPA have all explicitly called for a Supplemental EIS to
address these issues.

Additionally, technical changes to the details of the project were announced subsequent to the
release of the Draft EIS, including the incorporation of the Bakken oil fields “on-ramp” and the
withdrawal of the Department of Transportation special permit application. Moreover, the BP
Gulf disaster and numerous pipeline spills over the past six months have dramatically altered the
cultural context of this decision and have only increased its controversial nature. Landowners in
right-of-way states are justifiably concerned. These technical and contextual changes further
necessitate the release of a revised document to be circulated for public comment.

The environmental community echoes the requests of policymakers and concerned stakeholders.
We ask the Department of State to display its commitment to transparency and public
involvement by issuing a Supplemental EIS.