Dear President Obama,

We–a group of Nobel Peace Laureates–are writing today to ask you
to do the right thing for our environment and reject the proposal to
build the Keystone XL, a 1700-mile pipeline that would stretch from
Canada’s Alberta tar sands to the Texas Gulf Coast.

It is your decision to make.

The night you were nominated for president, you told the world that
under your leadership–and working together–the rise of the oceans
will begin to slow and the planet will begin to heal. You spoke of
creating a clean energy economy. This is a critical moment to make
good on that pledge, and make a lasting contribution to the health
and well being of everyone of this planet.

In asking you to make this decision, we recognize the more than 1200
Americans who risked arrest to protest in front of the White House
between August 20th and September 3rd. These brave individuals
have spoken movingly about experiencing the power of nonviolence
in facing authority. They represent millions of people whose lives
and livelihoods will be affected by construction and operation of
the pipeline in Alberta, Montana, South Dakota, Nebraska, Kansas,
Oklahoma and Texas.

All along its prospective route, the pipeline endangers farms, wildlife
and precious water aquifers–including the Ogallala Aquifer, the US’
main source of freshwater for America’s heartland. We are aware
that Nebraska’s Governor Dave Heineman–as well as two Nebraska
Senators–has urged you to reconsider the pathway of the pipeline.
In his letter to you he clearly stated his concern about the threat to
this crucial water source for Nebraska’s farmers and ranchers. The
aquifer supplies drinking water to two million people in Nebraska
and seven other states.

We know that another pipeline that covers some of the same route as
the proposed pipeline, and built by the same company proposing to build
Keystone XL, already leaked 14 times over its first year of operation.

Like you, we understand that strip-mining and drilling tar sands from
under Alberta’s Boreal forests and then transporting thousands of
barrels of oil a day from Canada through to Texas will not only hurt
people in the US–but will also endanger the entire planet. After
the oil fields of Saudi Arabia, the full development of the Alberta
tar sands will create the world’s second largest potential source of
global warming gases. As NASA climatologist James Hansen has said,
this is “essentially game over for the climate.”

There is a better way.

Your rejection of the pipeline provides a tremendous opportunity
to begin transition away from our dependence on oil, coal and gas
and instead increase investments in renewable energies and energy
efficiency.

We urge you to say ‘no’ to the plan proposed by the Canadian-based
company TransCanada to build the Keystone XL, and to turn your
attention back to supporting renewable sources of energy and clean
transportation solutions. This will be your legacy to Americans and
the global community: energy that sustains the lives and livelihoods
of future generations.