Monday, June 6, 2011

The Honorable Hillary Clinton Secretary of State Harry S Truman
Building 2201 C Street, NW Washington, D.C. 20520

Dear Secretary Clinton,

You are receiving this letter on behalf of over 3,000 Nebraska
landowners and citizens who ask that you deny TransCanada’s permit
to build the Keystone XL pipeline. We are opposed to the project
for the basic reason that the dangers and risks are real, long-term
and proven, while the benefits are speculative and short-term at best.

TransCanada’s track record of twelve spills in less than twelve
months on the Keystone I pipeline shows the inherent dangers of crude
oil pipelines and reveals the precarious nature of dealing with
a foreign corporation that has no interest in protecting American
citizens or our environment while on its quest to profit from the
dirtiest fuel source in history. Simply put, TransCanada didn’t
build the first pipeline right, and the safety concerns this raises are
too grave to allow approval of a second, more dangerous pipeline that
will have the potential to leak even more oil into our soil and water.

These safety concerns are even more serious when considering what
is at stake for Nebraskans. This pipeline would pose a threat to
the Sandhills and the Ogallala Aquifer, which are important natural
treasures to the people of our state. The State Department’s
Supplemental Environmental Impact Statement (SDEIS) fails to address
the magnitude of devastation that building such a pipeline through
the Sandhills would create. More research is needed in order to
determine a safer route for this pipeline. The SDEIS gives no
evidence of a full study of alternative routes for the pipeline,
but instead seems to follow TransCanada’s recommendation that
the shortest route is best. More time needs to be spent seriously
assessing the environmental damages caused by a Sandhills route,
and more time needs to be spent studying viable alternative routes.

According to Appendix E of the SDEIS released by your department,
there will be 1,194 wells in Nebraska within one mile of the proposed
pipeline route. That number is almost ten times the number of wells
in South Dakota and significantly higher than the next-highest state,
Montana, with 218 wells. Many of these wells are for domestic and
livestock use, and most of them are irrigation wells, which means that,
if contaminated, the water could quickly be dispersed to the surface
and contaminate crops intended for human consumption. Because of this,
we believe that the pipeline poses a danger to our national security,
threatening our domestic food and water supply.

Because Nebraska is not an “oil state” we have minimal standards
and safety guidelines concerning oil pipelines. Although our state
legislature has passed a minimal revegetation bill to hold pipeline
companies responsible for reclamation of damaged property, Nebraskans
need more time to establish standards that would protect landowners
and communities from many problems involved with underground oil
pipelines. We, the citizens of Nebraska are the “second house”
of our state’s unicameral legislature. We need the time to allow
the public to participate. This is why, at the very least, we ask
that you extend the public comment period to 120 days and schedule
citizen hearings in communities along the pipeline route. We also
ask you to delay your decision on the pipeline permit until one year
after the public comment period closes in order to allow time for
completion of the 2012 Nebraska legislative session.

We believe that the events of the past year are a warning sign that
more caution needs to be exercised when dealing with corporations
such as TransCanada. Again, while we strongly urge you to deny the
Keystone XL pipeline permit, we also ask you to take the minimum steps
of extending the public comment period, allowing public participation,
and delaying the process to allow for more thorough treatment of this
very important project that will have serious long-term implications
for our state.

Respectfully, Nebraskans

PS: We will submit to your staff the names and comments of the 3,431
Nebraskans who sent us their concerns. Additionally, Nebraskans held a
Citizens’ Hearing on the pipeline and you can find those videos here.
