Surface water we can see; groundwater is an act of faith: I say that
when I talk about aquifers. Because groundwater is out of sight, it
lends itself to many misconceptions. This is the situation with the
Ogallala/High Plains aquifer, as it relates to the proposed Keystone
XL pipeline.

    TransCanada should have to post a bond for any cleanup from a
    spill, but the pipeline would pose a minimal risk to the Ogallala
    aquifer.

An aquifer is any subsurface material that stores and transmits water
in usable amounts. Underground water by itself is not an aquifer; the
definition must include the host material. The Ogallala aquifer, named
after the rock formation that has nearly unimaginable water riches,
underlies much of the Great Plains. Recently, the U.S. Geological
Survey has begun using the term “High Plains Aquifer” to include
not just the Ogallala formation but also rock units below and more
recent deposits near the surface.

During the past 40 years, my colleagues and I at the Conservation and
Survey Division of the University of Nebraska have focused our research
on this aquifer. I personally have drilled more than 1,000 test holes
into and through its complexities; I have analyzed the volume and
behavior of the waters it holds. Here are several important findings.

1. The slope of the regional water table is from west to east;
the deep waters within the host rocks move persistently downhill
eastward. Approximately 80 percent of the Ogallala Aquifer lies to
the west of the proposed alignment, “uphill” of the pipeline’s
route. Spilled oil could not move upward against gravity.

2. Along much of the alignment, the depth to water is over 50
feet. Sediments above the top of the aquifer contain fine-grained
deposits like silts and clays. In a 25-year study of an oil spill near
Bemidji, Minn., the Geological Survey reported that “apparently
fine-grained layers impeded the infiltration and redistribution
of oil.”

3. If areas of the Ogallala were exposed to leaks from the pipeline,
the highly varied layers within the rock formation itself would serve
to localize the impact of a spill.

4. In places along the pipeline’s route, there are locations where
the water table is near or at the land surface. It is my understanding
that in these areas, TransCanada will encase the pipeline in a
waterproof covering and cement jacket.

All this comforts me with the knowledge that a leak from the XL
pipeline would pose a minimal risk to the aquifer as a whole. However,
we should require TransCanada to post a bond for any cleanup in the
event of a spill. With that in place, we should approve the pipeline
while simultaneously implementing an aggressive national policy
that mandates energy efficiencies and finances the development of
alternative energy sources for transportation.