Thank you for taking time to visit with me when you were in Nebraska.
I really appreciated the time. You indicated that you wanted to
continue the dialogue regarding the legal issues that I raised.
I would like to reiterate some of those issues and I look forward to
your response.

You confirmed at our meeting that individual states could enact
laws establishing primary siting authority of oil pipelines, and
that the federal government does not possess any siting authority
for oil pipelines. If prior to your agency’s action on the
pending permit application, the State of Nebraska enacts siting
legislation that results in the disapproval of the current proposed
route through the Nebraska sandhills and over the Ogallala Aquifer
but your Administration approves the permit with the route over
the Ogallala Aquifer, then would the State of Nebraska’s decision
require a rerouting of the Nebraska portion of the pipeline based on
its primary siting authority?

As we discussed, in our meeting, the article in the Lincoln Journal
Star implied that the State Department only has the authority to
approve or deny a pipeline company’s permit and not the pipeline’s
route, which is not totally accurate. I believe that federal approval,
if granted, would include a specific route. Pursuant to Executive
Order 13337, “…if the Secretary of State finds that the issuance
of a permit to the applicant would serve the national interest, the
Secretary shall prepare a permit, in such form and with such terms
and conditions as the national interest may in the Secretary’s
judgment require…”

Rerouting the pipeline around the Ogallala Aquifer is in the
national interest; therefore, I request that Secretary Clinton
use her permitting authority to change the route of the proposed
Keystone XL pipeline. Finally, I want to emphasize, as I did in my
August 31, 2011, letter to President Obama and Secretary Clinton,
that I am opposed to the proposed route of the pipeline, not the
pipeline itself. Again, thank you for meeting with me and I look
forward to your response.