I write today regarding a letter you received from TransCanada
dated November 3. 2010. The letter  that argues that a Supplemental
Environmental Impact Statement is not needed because the current "DEIS
fully takes into account all reasonable alternatives."  The facts
suggest otherwise.

Examining a potential route that parallels the existing Keystone route
is not only reasonable, but also consistent with the purpose and need
of the project, and certainly feasible. Keystone Xl's purpose and need
are defined as establishing a connection between important petroleum
resources in Canada and refining capacity in the United States. A
route for Keystone XL that parallels the existing Keystone pipeline
would of course satisfy this requirement in the same way that the
existing Keystone pipeline does. In addition, this route crosses far
less land in the United States than the route selected as "preferred"
in the existing DEIS. TransCanada's letter ignores this fact.

Moreover, TransCunada's letter repeatedly argues that the shortest
pipeline routes minimize environmental impact, but fails to acknowledge
that their own preferred route precludes the shortest overall
route. The letter defends the selected route through the United States,
for example, as "a direct diagonal route." However, this statement
ignores the fact that the initial pipeline segment through Canada
is not a continuation of that "direct diagonal route - and therefore
the overall route is neither the shortest distance between the oil's
Canadian source and its U.S. destinations, nor the shortest route in
the United States. Once TransCanada selected the border crossing at
Morgan, Montana, it was transformed into a "control point" for the
purposes of the DEIS, and TransCanada thereafter argues that deviating
from this control point within the DI AS would be out of scope.

Viewed in this way TransCanada's defense of its proposed route
appears to be based in part on preference, and not on distance and
environmental impact. I respectfully reiterate my request for a
Supplemental DEIS and ask that your decisions regarding what is
appropriately contained in it not be determined by TransCanada's
preferences or the preferences of Canadian regulators. Instead. I
ask that you locus on the interests of American citizens and on
the potential impact on irreplaceable natural resources such as the
Ogallala Aquifer.

I appreciate your consideration of these important facts.
