## Invitation to Washington D.C.
By Maude Barlow, Wendell Berry, Tom Goldtooth, Danny Glover, James 
Hansen, Wes Jackson, Naomi Klein, Bill McKibben, George Poitras, Gus
Speth, and David Suzuki - June 23rd, 2011 

Dear Friends,

This will be a slightly longer letter than common for the internet
age—it's serious stuff.

The short version is we want you to consider doing something hard:
coming to Washington in the hottest and stickiest weeks of the
summer and engaging in civil disobedience that will quite possibly
get you arrested.

The full version goes like this:

As you know, the planet is steadily warming: 2010 was the warmest
year on record, and we've seen the resulting chaos in almost every
corner of the earth.

And as you also know, our democracy is increasingly controlled by
special interests interested only in their short-term profit.

These two trends collide this summer in Washington, where the State
Department and the White House have to decide whether to grant a
certificate of 'national interest' to some of the biggest fossil
fuel players on earth. These corporations want to build the so-called
'Keystone XL Pipeline' from Canada’s tar sands to Texas refineries.

To call this project a horror is serious understatement. The tar
sands have wrecked huge parts of Alberta, disrupting ways of life
in indigenous communities—First Nations communities in Canada,
and tribes along the pipeline route in the U.S. have demanded the
destruction cease. The pipeline crosses crucial areas like the Oglalla
Aquifer where a spill would be disastrous—and though the pipeline
companies insist they are using ‘state of the art’ technologies
that should leak only once every 7 years, the precursor pipeline and
its pumping stations have leaked a dozen times in the past year. These
local impacts alone would be cause enough to block such a plan. But
the Keystone Pipeline would also be a fifteen hundred mile fuse to
the biggest carbon bomb on the continent, a way to make it easier
and faster to trigger the final overheating of our planet, the one
place to which we are all indigenous.

How much carbon lies in the recoverable tar sands of Alberta? A recent
calculation from some of our foremost scientists puts the figure at
about 200 parts per million. Even with the new pipeline they won't
be able to burn that much overnight—but each development like this
makes it easier to get more oil out. As the climatologist Jim Hansen
(one of the signatories to this letter) explained, if we have any
chance of getting back to a stable climate "the principal requirement
is that coal emissions must be phased out by 2030 and unconventional
fossil fuels, such as tar sands, must be left in the ground." In
other words, he added, "if the tar sands are thrown into the mix it
is essentially game over." The Keystone pipeline is an essential
part of the game. “Unless we get increased market access, like
with Keystone XL, we're going to be stuck,” said Ralph Glass, an
economist and vice-president at AJM Petroleum Consultants in Calgary,
told a Canadian newspaper last week.

Given all that, you'd suspect that there's no way the Obama
administration would ever permit this pipeline. But in the last few
months the administration has signed pieces of paper opening much of
Alaska to oil drilling, and permitting coal-mining on federal land
in Wyoming that will produce as much CO2 as 300 powerplants operating
at full bore.

And Secretary of State Clinton has already said she’s 'inclined'
to recommend the pipeline go forward. Partly it's because of the
political commotion over high gas prices, though more tar sands oil
would do nothing to change that picture. But it's also because of
intense pressure from industry. The US Chamber of Commerce—a bigger
funder of political campaigns than the RNC and DNC combined—has
demanded that the administration "move quickly to approve the Keystone
XL pipeline," which is not so surprising—they’ve also told the
U.S. EPA that if the planet warms that will be okay because humans
can ‘adapt their physiology’ to cope. The Koch Brothers, needless
to say, are also backing the plan, and may reap huge profits from it.

So we're pretty sure that without serious pressure the Keystone
Pipeline will get its permit from Washington. A wonderful coalition
of environmental groups has built a strong campaign across the
continent—from Cree and Dene indigenous leaders to Nebraska farmers,
they've spoken out strongly against the destruction of their land. We
need to join them, and to say even if our own homes won't be crossed
by this pipeline, our joint home—the earth—will be wrecked by
the carbon that pours down it.

And we need to say something else, too: it's time to stop letting
corporate power make the most important decisions our planet faces. We
don't have the money to compete with those corporations, but we
do have our bodies, and beginning in mid August many of us will use
them. We will, each day, march on the White House, risking arrest with
our trespass. We will do it in dignified fashion, demonstrating that
in this case we are the conservatives, and that our foes—who would
change the composition of the atmosphere are dangerous radicals. Come
dressed as if for a business meeting—this is, in fact, serious
business.

And another sartorial tip—if you wore an Obama button during the 2008
campaign, why not wear it again? We very much still want to believe in
the promise of that young Senator who told us that with his election
the 'rise of the oceans would begin to slow and the planet start to
heal.' We don't understand what combination of bureaucratic obstinacy
and insider dealing has derailed those efforts, but we remember his
request that his supporters continue on after the election to pressure
his government for change. We'll do what we can.

And one more thing: we don't just want college kids to be the
participants in this fight. They’ve led the way so far on climate
change—10,000 came to DC for the Powershift gathering earlier
this spring. They've marched this month in West Virginia to protest
mountaintop removal; a young man named Tim DeChristopher faces
sentencing this summer in Utah for his creative protest.

Now it's time for people who've spent their lives pouring carbon
into the atmosphere to step up too, just as many of us did in earlier
battles for civil rights or for peace. Most of us signing this letter
are veterans of this work, and we think it's past time for elders
to behave like elders. One thing we don't want is a smash up: if you
can’t control your passions, this action is not for you.

This won't be a one-shot day of action. We plan for it to continue
for several weeks, till the administration understands we won't go
away. Not all of us can actually get arrested—half the signatories
to this letter live in Canada, and might well find our entry into the
U.S. barred. But we will be making plans for sympathy demonstrations
outside Canadian consulates in the U.S., and U.S. consulates in
Canada—the decision-makers need to know they're being watched.

Twenty years of patiently explaining the climate crisis to our
leaders hasn't worked. Maybe moral witness will help. You have to
start somewhere, and we choose here and now.

If you think you might want to be a part of this action, we need you
to sign up here.

As plans solidify in the next few weeks we'll be in touch with
you to arrange nonviolence training; our colleagues at a variety
of environmental and democracy campaigns will be coordinating the
actual arrangements.

We know we're asking a lot. You should think long and hard on it, and
pray if you're the praying type. But to us, it's as much privilege as
burden to get to join this fight in the most serious possible way. We
hope you'll join us.