I write as a follow-up to our July 2, 2030, phone call, wherein I
visited with you and other officials at the U.S. Department of State
regarding the Keystone XL pipeline.

During our conversation, I stressed to you the importance of the State
Department seeking further information and viewpoints from state.and
local officials within my home state of Nebraska regarding the pipeline
before completing your agency’s review of the Draft Environmental
Impact Statement (EIS).  This is absalutely essential in light of
recent concerns raised by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA) regarding the Draft E{S and an extension of the timetable for
review of the EIS, as recently posted on the State Department’s
website: "After further consultation with those agencies, the
Department has extended the time for all consulted federal agencies to
provide their views to the Department until ninety (90) days following
issuance of the final EIS." By doing so, the State Department will
gain a better understanding of the safety issues and environmental
impacts which the proposed oil pipeline would have on Nebraska and
its ecosystem.

With the ongoing tragedy in the Gulf of Mexico and today’s pipeline
break into the Kalamazoo River in southwest Michigan, it is important
in my view that the State Department secks out all of the analyses tt

XL pipeline, not only from federal sources, but also from state
government can regarding the Keystone.  agencies. Doing so will help
in answering the many concerns and uncertainties my constituency has

raised regarding the proposed pipeline and ensure that whatever
decision the State Department makes will take into full account the
importance of the Ogallala Aquifer and the Sandhills to Nebraska’s
economic and agricultural livelihood.


Therefore, I respectfully request an update as to the State
Department's efforts, including copies of letters from the agency and
responses received, to gain a greater understanding from state and
local officials surrounding the environmental and economic impacts
the proposed pipeline will have on my home state of Nebraska.

Mr. Under Secretary, thank you for your consideration of my request. I
look forward to hearing from you soon.