Pipeline promotes possible tragedy

    By SUSAN S. SEACREST

    Jun 23, 2010

I read with interest Art Hovey's article about the Keystone XL pipeline
project in the Lincoln Journal Star (June 13). Along with Hovey's
informative article, the paper featured two other stories describing
successful environmental education programs: the annual Water Fest
at Holmes Lake and the development of Nature Explore classrooms.

For more than 23 years, I also worked to educate people about the
environment through programs at the Groundwater Foundation. Both Water
Fest and Nature Explore help people appreciate and protect natural
resources. To me it was poignant to read about their successes at
the same time I was reading about a project that could contaminate,
perhaps forever, a large portion the Ogallala Aquifer.

The Ogallala Aquifer contains approximately º of the volume of
the High Plains system and is considered one of the great fresh
water resources of the world. The aquifer provides the ecological
underpinning of the largest sand dune area in North America, the
Nebraska Sand Hills, and the entire system recharges lakes, streams
and wet meadows throughout the region.  People are also reading…

The porosity and transmissivity of this system is very high, and a
leaking pipe -- especially a buried one -- would cause instant and
widespread damage to the quality of the groundwater. The pollution
plume would spread indefinitely and the threat would grow as the
plume traveled.

In addition, TransCanada has decided to use thinner than usual pipe
and pump slurry at higher than normal pressures. These conditions
increase the risk of a leak. Engineered projects have inherent
challenges, and pipes are notorious for structural weaknesses --
note leaks in the Alaska oil pipeline and the current tragedy in the
Gulf of Mexico. If asked six months ago, I am certain BP would have
issued reassuring statements about the safety of offshore drilling.

The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency considers pollution prevention
the only viable management strategy for groundwater, and this buried
pipeline represents a direct assault on this principle. The health
risks to the population that rely on the aquifer for drinking are
unacceptably high, and public benefit is at peril should the project
go forward as planned.

The pipeline could be placed above ground where leaks and problems are
more readily recognized and addressed. In addition, the route could
be modified so the pipeline does not go though one of our country's
greatest natural treasures. To stand by and let this project go forward
ignores these risks and promotes a future environmental tragedy.

Susan S. Seacrest of Lincoln is president emeritus of The Groundwater
Foundation.