
Earthjustice * National Wildlife Federation * Western Organization
of Resource Councils * Natural Resources Defense Council * Plains
Justice * Sierra Club July 2, 2010

Elizabeth Orlando Keystone XL Project Manager U.S. Department of State
OES/ENV Room 2657 Washington, DC 20520 xlpipelineproject@state.gov
Via electronic and U.S. mail Re:

Public Comments on Draft Environmental Impact Statement for the
Proposed TransCanada Keystone XL Pipeline Project

Dear Ms. Orlando: On behalf of Earthjustice, National Wildlife
Federation, Natural Resources Defense Council, Plains Justice,
Western Organization of Resource Councils, and the Sierra Club,
we submit the following comments regarding the Draft Environmental
Impact Statement (DEIS) for the proposed TransCanada Keystone XL
Pipeline Project (hereinafter “the project”). The Notice of
Availability of the Draft Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) for
the project was published in the Federal Register vol. 75, no. 751
(April 20, 2010) and indicated the public comment period for this
proposal closed on May 31, 2010. However, it was extended to June 16,
2010 pursuant to the Notice of Extension of Public Comment Period
for the Proposed Keystone XL Pipeline Project Draft Environmental
Impact Statement, published in the Federal Register vol.75, no. 832,
(April 30, 2010); and further extended to July 2, 2010 pursuant to the
Notice of Extension of Public Comment Period for the Proposed Keystone
XL Pipeline Project; Draft Environmental Impact Statement and Notice of
Additional Public Comment Meetings, published in the Federal Register
vol. 75, no. 114 (June 15, 2010).3 In the comments below, we outline
our concerns regarding the rationale for building this pipeline;
address the potential environmental impacts of the project including
the impacts on the global climate, wetlands, and wildlife; highlight
the overall shortcomings of the cumulative impacts analysis in the
DEIS; and describe the inadequacies of its alternatives analysis. We 1

75 Fed. Reg. 20,653 (April 20, 2010).  75 Fed. Reg. 22,890 (April
30, 2010).  3 75 Fed. Reg. 33,884 (June 15, 2010).  2

recommend that the Department of State re-issue the DEIS for public
comment after addressing these significant deficiencies, because
under law they must be considered before the Secretary makes a final
determination on whether to issue a Presidential Permit.  The proposed
Keystone XL DEIS is particularly troublesome in light of the many
recent oil spill disasters. On April 20, 2010, the Deepwater Horizon
offshore oil rig exploded in the Gulf of Mexico, killing 11 workers and
creating one of the worst environmental disasters in history. 4 Months
later, the broken pipe continues to spew millions of gallons of crude
oil into the Gulf each day, with no end to the devastation in sight.5
This disaster has exposed a shocking lack of government oversight
of the oil industry and a complete lack of readiness to respond to
such tragedies.  Similarly, a string of recent oil pipeline accidents
have exposed a lack of oversight of the oil pipeline industry and
a lack of spill detection and response plans. In January of 2010,
an Enbridge pipeline spilled over 3,000 barrels of crude oil in
North Dakota.6 In late April, another Enbridge pipeline ruptured
and leaked over 210 gallons of tar sands crude oil into Minnesota
wetlands.7 The exact date of the Minnesota spill is unknown because
the accident went completely undiscovered until firefighers working
in the area happened to notice crude oil covering the ground while
investigating a wildfire.8 In May of 2010, the Trans-Alaska Pipeline,
owned partly by BP, had a “series of mishaps” that resulted in a
power outage that opened relief valves and spilled several thousand
barrels of crude oil.9 Luckily, this spill was mostly contained in
“backup containers.” Id. On June 12, 2010, a massive spill from
a Chevron crude oil pipeline

Associated Press, Some Oil Spill Events on
Thursday, June 17, 2010, June 17, 2010, available at
http://www.google.com/hostednews/ap/article/ALeqM5i
yfHJzPLDeBIhG5JDEF6VbaPR8QD9GD5JCG0 (last visited
June 22, 2010), and attached as Exhibit 1.  5 Id.
6 Marketwire, Enbridge Energy Partners Lakehead Pipeline System
Reports Crude Oil Spill in North Dakota, January 10, 2010, available at
http://www.marketwire.com/press-release/Enbridge-Energy-Partners-Lakehead-Pipeline-SystemReports-Crude-Oil-Spill-North-Dakota-NYSE-EEP-1099523.htm
(last visited June 22, 2010), and attached as Exhibit 2.
7 Elizabeth Dunbar, Pipeline Leaks Oil in Wetlands on Leech Lake
Reservation, MINNESOTA PUBLIC RADIO (April 21, 2010), available at
http://minnesota.publicradio.org/display/web/2010/04/21/oil-leak/
(last visited June 22, 2010), and attached as Exhibit 3.
8 Robert Pore, Minnesota Spill Raises Questions about
Nebraska’s Ogallala Aquifer, AGLINES, April 22, 2010, available at
http://www.aglines.com/2010/04/minnesota-oil-spill-raisesquestions-about-nebraskas-ogallala-aquifer/
(last visited June 22, 2010), and attached as Exhibit 4.  9 Reuters,
BP-Owned Alaska Oil Pipeline Shut after Spill, May 25, 2010, available
at http://www.reuters.com/article/idUSTRE64P04U20100526 (last visited
June 22, 2010), and attached as Exhibit 5.  2

was discovered in Salt Lake City, Utah.10 The reason for the breach
is unknown as of the time these comments were written, and crews are
continuing to try to stop the giant oil slick from reaching the Great
Salt Lake. On June 23, 2010, a leak was discovered on an abandoned
pipeline in Oklahoma after it had spilled over 250 barrels of oil
into the Deep Fork of the Canadian River.11 These repeated accidents
demonstrate the very real dangers posed by crude oil pipelines in
our communities and a need for increased oversight. The DEIS fails to
adequately analyze the risks of these spills and fails to contain an
emergency response plan. PHMSA must also evaluate the adequacy of the
Emergency Response Plan (ERP) pursuant to NEPA before DOS reissues the
DEIS for public comment. The ERP is a major federal action that will
significantly affect eh quality of the human environment. As such,
PHMSA must prepare an EIS that evaluates several alternatives of an
ERP, including but not limited to: what emergency response methods
and practices should be in place; what types of equipment should
ready and available for emergency response, how much of it should
be available, and where it should be stationed along the pipeline
route; and how much emergency response personnel should be trained
and available along the route.  The recent oil spills and pipeline
ruptures are wake-up calls. If approved, the Keystone XL pipeline would
transport nearly a million barrels of heavy tar sands crude oil across
America’s heartland each day. DOS, PHMSA, and all other federal
agencies involved must take every possible precaution to prevent an
accident with Keystone XL and ensure that if an accident does occur,
local communities and natural resources are adequately protected.12
Furthermore, PHMSA is considering granting a special permit that
would allow TransCanada to build the pipeline with thinner, higher
pressure steel pipe, which would save the company millions of dollars
in costs but would put rural communities in greater danger. Several
recently-released documents have revealed a disturbing trend of
approving such permits without adequately analyzing the risks.13 For
example, PHMSA should prepare a full Environmental 10

Maile Tua’one, Cleanup Efforts Continue in Salt
Lake City after Chevron Oil Spill, June 14, 2010), available at
http://www.fox13now.com/news/kstu-city-working-to-contain-oil-spill-inred-butte-canyon,0,5422602.story
(last visited June 22, 2010), and attached
as Exhibit 6.  11 John A. Williams, Oil Spill in
Oklahoma City River may take days to Clean up, NEWSOK, June 23, 2010,
http://stage.newsok.com/oil-spill-in-oklahoma-city-river-may-take-days-to-cleanup/article/3470683?custom_click=masthead_topten#ixzz0ro8J79Ra,
attached as Exhibit 6A. In fact, there have been over 170,000 incidents
over the last decade causing 134 deaths and $631 million dollars in
damages. Statement of Honorable Corrine Brown, September 10, 2009,
attached as Exhibit 6B; Pipeline Safety Trust, Hazardous Liquid
Pipeline Incidents 2-09, attached as Exhibit 6C.  12 For more detailed
concerns related to PHMSA and the risk of spills, see Parts IV.D.9
and IV.G, supra.  13 See, e.g, Dept. of Transportation, Office of
Inspector General, New Approaches Needed in Managing PHMSA’s Special
Permits and Approvals Program, March 4, 2010, attached as Exhibit 6D;
Findings, Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure, April 21,
2010, attached as Exhibit 6E; Written Statement of Cynthia Quarterman,
April 22, 2010, attached as Exhibit 6F; 3

Impact Statement (EIS) before any decisions are made on the special
permit or the pipeline itself.  DOS should issue a new Draft EIS
for public comment only after it has a full and fair opportunity to
evaluate the risks associated with the PHMSA special permit.  Finally,
under Executive Order 13,337, a Presidential Permit can only be issued
if the proposed project “would be in the national interest.”14
For the reasons discussed in these comments, we believe that this
proposed pipeline is not in the national interest since it will
increase US reliance on fuels from sources such as the Canadian oil
sands (also know as tar sands) that are environmentally destructive
and that increase damage from global warming.  I.

BACKGROUND A.

Relevant NEPA Legal Requirements

These comments are submitted to address the DEIS’s compliance
with National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA). NEPA is our “basic
national charter for the protection of the environment.” 40 C.F.R. §
1500.1. Congress enacted NEPA “[t]o declare a national policy
which will encourage productive and enjoyable harmony between man and
his environment; to promote efforts which will prevent or eliminate
damage to the environment and biosphere and stimulate the health and
welfare of man; [and] to enrich the understanding of the ecological
systems and natural resources important to the Nation.” 42 U.S.C. §
4321. To accomplish these purposes, NEPA requires all agencies of
the federal government to prepare a “detailed statement” that
discusses the environmental impacts of, and reasonable alternatives to,
all “major Federal actions significantly affecting the quality of
the human environment.” 42 U.S.C. § 4332(2)(C). This statement
is commonly known as an environmental impact statement (EIS).
See 40 C.F.R. Part 1502.  The EIS must “provide full and fair
discussion of significant environmental impacts and shall inform
decision-makers and the public of the reasonable alternatives which
would avoid or minimize adverse impacts or enhance the quality of
the human environment.” 40 C.F.R. § 1502.1. This discussion must
include an analysis of “direct effects,” which are “caused by the
action and occur at the same time and place,” as well as “indirect
effects which . . . are later in time or farther removed in distance,
but are still reasonably foreseeable.” 40 C.F.R. § 1508.8.  An EIS
must also consider the cumulative impacts of the proposed federal
agency action together with past, present and reasonably foreseeable
future actions, including all federal and non-federal activities. 40
C.F.R. § 1508.7. Furthermore, an EIS must “rigorously explore and
objectively evaluate all reasonable alternatives” to the proposed
project. 40 C.F.R. § 1502.14(a).  In this case, NEPA requires that
the Department of State’s DEIS must assess all impacts of the
Keystone XL project, including any associated refining facilities,
and the indirect impacts Statement of the Honorable James Oberstar,
September 10, 2009, attached as Exhibit 6G; PHMSA, Integrity Threats to
Hazardous Liquid Pipelines, September 18, 2006, attached as Exhibit 6H.
14 Executive Order (EO) 11423 (33 Fed. Reg. 11741) as amended by EO
12847 (58 Fed. Reg.  29511) and EO 13337 (69 Fed. Reg. 25299).  4

of extraction and end use combustion. 40 C.F.R. §§ 1502.14 and
1502.16. Specifically, the EIS must “present the environmental
impacts of the proposal and the alternatives in a comparative form,
thus sharply defining the issues and providing a clear basis for choice
among options by the decision maker and the public.” 40 C.F.R. §
1502.14. In order to adequately assess the environmental impacts of
the project and of reasonable alternatives to the proposed project,
the DEIS must assess the direct, indirect, and cumulative impacts
that the proposed project and each alternative would have.  For the
reasons stated below, the DEIS for the Keystone XL project is legally
and technically flawed because the U.S. Department of State (“State
Department” or “DOS”) failed to adequately assess all of the
direct, indirect and cumulative impacts of the project. The DEIS also
improperly defines the project’s purpose and need and fails to ensure
the scientific integrity of its analysis. Accordingly, we request that
the State Department conclude that the project will cause significant
unpreventable environmental harm and is not in the national interest,
and on these bases choose the no action alternative and deny the
application for a Presidential Permit.  In the alternative, we request
that the State Department fully and completely address the following
concerns and re-issue the DEIS for further public comment.  B.

Overview of the Keystone XL Pipeline Project 15

As summarized in the DEIS, the project would consist of approximately
1,380 miles of new 36-inch-diameter pipeline in the U.S. The proposed
pipeline would cross the international border between Saskatchewan,
Canada and the United States near Morgan, Montana. The project
initially would have a nominal transport capacity of 700,000 barrels
per day (bpd) of crude oil, with up to 200,000 bpd delivered to
an existing terminal in Cushing, Oklahoma and the remaining amount
shipped to existing delivery points in Nederland (near Port Arthur),
Texas, and Moore Junction (in Harris County), Texas. By increasing the
pumping capacity in the future, the Project could ultimately transport
up to 900,000 bpd of crude oil through the proposed pipeline. At
that throughput, up to 200,000 bpd would be delivered to the Cushing
Oil Terminal and the remainder would be delivered to the existing
terminals in Texas. (DEIS at 2.)  The project includes three new
pipeline segments plus additional pumping capacity on the previously
permitted Cushing Extension Segment of the Keystone Pipeline Project
(Keystone Cushing Extension): 1) the Steele City Segment (from Morgan,
Montana to Steele City, Nebraska) that connects to the northern
end of the previously approved, and currently under construction,
Keystone Cushing Extension; 2) the Gulf Coast Segment (from Cushing,
Oklahoma to Nederland, Texas) that connects to the southern end of
the Keystone Cushing Extension; and 3) Houston Lateral (from the Gulf
Coast Segment, in Liberty County, Texas to 15

Commenters cite throughout this letter to numerous sources to support
this submission. Many of the resources are available on the world wide
web and URL’s have been provided where available. Because of size
constraints the full set of exhibits will not be sent via email. With
the hard-copy version of this letter, Commenters are serving on DOS
a DVD with copies of the cited references. Commenters expect DOS to
make all cited references part of the official administrative record
upon which DOS makes any decisions regarding the adequacy of the EIS
or the issuance of a Presidential Permit.  5

Moore Junction, in Harris County, Texas). DEIS at 2. In addition,
the DEIS identifies as connected actions pump stations, power lines
and transmission lines. DEIS at 3. In addition, the tar sands crude
carried by the Keystone XL pipeline will feed numerous refineries and
spur refinery expansions to process the heavy tar sands crude. See
Keystone XL Notice of Intent. 74 Fed. Reg. 5019 (Jan. 28, 2009).
This project must be considered in connection with other Canadian tar
sands pipelines, namely the Alberta Clipper pipeline and the Keystone
pipeline. The Alberta Clipper Pipeline Project (Alberta Clipper)
built by Enbridge Energy, Limited Partnership and its affiliates
(collectively Enbridge) is a 992-mile long, 36-inch diameter pipeline
running from Hardisty, Alberta, Canada, crossing the border near
Neche, North Dakota and continuing through northern Minnesota to a
facility in Superior, Wisconsin. It is at or near completion, and
will carry approximately 450,000 barrels per day (with an ultimate
capacity of 880,000 barrels per day) of heavy crude oil from the
Canadian oil sands to refineries throughout the Midwest, including in
Superior, Wisconsin. The Keystone pipeline was built by TransCanada,
the applicant for Keystone XL, and it will carry tar sands crude in a
pipeline through North and South Dakota, Nebraska, Missouri, Illinois,
Kansas, and Oklahoma. The Keystone pipeline extends approximately 1,384
miles within the United States, from the US/Canada border in western
Pembina County, North Dakota to terminals at Cushing in Oklahoma,
Wood River in Illinois, and Patoka in Illinois.  This large-scale
expansion of pipeline and refinery capacity to transport heavy crude
from the Canadian tar sands to the US reflects a feverish rush of
oil sands investment and development in Canada that is dependent on a
parallel increase in demand in the United States.  The corresponding
push to expand tar sands oil delivery and refining systems in the US16
comes at a time when the nation is looking to reduce its dependence on
fossil fuels, expand the development of renewable fuels and reduce its
emissions of harmful greenhouse gases.17 Surprisingly, the Keystone
XL DEIS fails to consider the role of renewable fuels sources in
its analysis of US energy needs and does not take a hard look at
the global warming implications of this expanded network. For these
reasons, and the other reasons discussed below, the DEIS is fatally
flawed and should either be revised and reissued for public comment
or, preferably, the permit should not issue and the project should
be abandoned altogether.  16

See the maps prepared by Oil Sands Truth depicting tar sands exports
and pipeline expansions projected for 2015 and 2030 based on data
provided by NEB, Enbridge, Imperial Oil, TransCanada Pipelines,
and the State of Alaska. Available at http://oilsandstruth.org/maps
(last visited June 8, 2010) and attached hereto as Exhibit 7.  17 See,
for example, the Obama-Biden Comprehensive New Energy for America Plan
which includes investment in “a clean energy future,” improving
energy security by “sav[ing] more oil than we currently import
from the Middle East and Venezuela combined,” renewable portfolio
standards for utilities, and an “economy-wide cap-and-trade program
to reduce greenhouse gas emissions 80 percent by 2050.” Available at
http://www.whitehouse.gov/agenda/energy_and_environment/ (last visited
June 8, 2010) and attached hereto as Exhibit 8. It is particularly
noteworthy that the plan does not look to replace Middle Eastern and
Venezuelan oil with oil from Canada, but instead proposes within 10
years to eliminate US demand for that oil.  6

II.

REQUEST FOR STAY OF DECISION AND REVISION OF EIS TO ADDRESS PENDING
MATTERS A.

Pending CEQ Guidance

In a letter dated April 23, 2010 to Secretary Clinton, which we
incorporate by reference,18 Sierra Club et. al. asked that DOS
postpone consideration of the Keystone XL application until Council
on Environmental Quality (CEQ) guidance on greenhouse gases and
climate change can be finalized and taken into account. In her
February 2010 memo to heads of Federal Departments and Agencies,
CEQ Chair Nancy Sutley affirmed that the requirements of NEPA are
applicable to greenhouse gas emissions and climate change impacts.19
A draft of these guidelines was released by CEQ, 75 Fed. Reg. 8046
(Feb. 23, 2010), but the Keystone XL EIS should not be finalized
until after the final CEQ guidelines are issued, so that they can
be considered and applied in the final EIS.  The greenhouse gas
emissions associated with this project and connected actions and their
contribution to climate change are critical environmental impacts
of the project. Over its entire lifecycle – the synthetic crude
oil produced from tar sands emits at least 20% more global warming
pollution than conventional oil. Furthermore, because tar sands oil
is a heavier crude, the U.S. refineries that process it will produce
higher levels of pollutants that damage human health and lead to
more smog, haze and acid rain. Replacing 900,000 barrels per day
of conventional oil with tar sands oil, for example, would result
in approximately 38 million metric tons of additional greenhouse
gas emissions per year, equal to adding over 6 million cars to our
roads. The U.S. transportation sector already accounts for one third
of our global warming emissions. We feel very strongly that these
aspects of the project must be given a more thorough analysis in the
EIS, and that the preparers would benefit from the final guidelines
from CEQ.  Therefore, we urge you to postpone any further progress on
this substantial pipeline until the final guidelines from CEQ can be
diligently reviewed and incorporated. If the pipeline's contribution
to atmospheric carbon overload is considered, the only reasonable
judgment is that the pipeline is not in the national interest and
should be rejected.  B.

Pending Montana Public Service Commission Matters

In a letter from Sierra Club et. al. to DOS dated February 11,
2010 we submitted supplemental scoping comments on the project,
and we incorporate that letter herein.20 Unfortunately, the DOS
refused to consider those comments. Therefore, we again ask you to
consider those comments and address the matter of the Montana Public
Service Commission (PSC) informing TransCanada that it must apply
for common-carrier status pursuant to MCA § 63-13-101(1), because it
will be owning, operating, and managing the Keystone XL Pipeline in 18

Attached as Exhibit 8A.  CEQ Chairwoman Nancy Sutley,
“Steps to Modernize and Reinvigorate NEPA.” Available at
www.whitehouse.gov/administration/eop/ceq/initiatives/nepa (last
visited June 8, 2010), and attached as Exhibit 9.  20 Attached as
Exhibit 10.  19

the state of Montana, engaging in the business of transporting
crude petroleum by pipeline, and constructing and maintaining the
Keystone XL Pipeline along and under public roads and highways
in Montana. Significantly, the state of Montana is considering
a possible interconnection point in Montana and lateral pipeline
extensions that would have significant impacts on land and water
resources and pipeline safety. This additional infrastructure has the
potential for significant environmental impacts, could significantly
alter the size and character of the project, and it comprises a
reasonable alternative configuration of the project.  For example,
the EIS must analyze the environmental impacts of increased capacity
that may result from additional inputs of petroleum in Montana. The
pipeline is projected to have an ultimate capacity of 900,000 bpd,
but the capacity may rise significantly when and if the PSC orders
TransCanada to allow additional inputs, or the ultimate capacity
may simply be reached sooner. An increase in pipeline capacity would
amplify the environmental impacts from refining and end use of the
petroleum, and may heighten the risk of spills and the severity
of environmental impact if a spill were to occur. It would also
drastically increase the physical footprint of the project, due
to increased pipeline length, access roads, pumping stations, and
electric transmission lines. These impacts are reasonably foreseeable
indirect, cumulative and/or connected actions that must be considered
in the EIS.  The EIS must also analyze how these additional sources
of conventional crude oil will interact with the tar sands crude
oil being transported from Alberta and whether any operational or
design changes will be necessary. For example, the EIS should examine
whether the currently-planned pumping stations will be sufficient to
accommodate the additional sources and additional capacity; whether
the different chemical composition of oil from Montana and North
Dakota presents different threats and impacts in the event of a leak
or rupture, whether the amount of diluent or heating that is required
to move the crude through the pipeline will change; what additional
facilities, operational plans, or emergency response plans will be
necessary, and what the potential impacts to the environment and local
communities will be.  If it is required to offer oil transportation
services to U.S. petroleum producers in Montana and North Dakota,
the Keystone XL pipeline will likely increase the amount of oil
development in Montana due to the availability of additional pipeline
capacity. This increase in domestic oil development is an indirect,
connected, and/or cumulative action. As such, its environmental
impacts must be evaluated, including but not limited to an increase
in use of hydraulic fracturing, increase in greenhouse gas (GHG)
emissions, and the displacement effect it will have on renewable
energy development and the renewable energy market.21 Finally, the
EIS must examine the environmental impacts of the lateral lines that
will transport the Montana oil to their connections with the main
Keystone XL pipeline. Specifically, 21

The DEIS notes that the heavy crude supplied by Keystone XL pipeline
will likely be used for power generation and other uses in addition
to transportation fuels. DEIS at 3.14-36. The DEIS fails to consider
the displacement effect on all types of renewable and alternative
power generation sources, such as wind, solar, geothermal, and
nuclear; as well as transportation technologies such as biofuels and
hybrid/electric automobiles; and public transportation and energy
efficiency initiatives.  8

the EIS should contain an analysis of several alternatives for the
lateral lines, including analyses of their respective water crossings
and proximity to sensitive areas.  C.

Public Participation Issues

On February 20, 2009 Sierra Club wrote the DOS regarding public
participation issues, and we incorporate that letter herein.22
As set forth in that letter, there has been short notice before
public meetings and the remote locations hindered meaningful public
participation. We requested a 90-day extension for scoping comments,
public meetings in the capitols of each State along the route, and a
public meeting in Washington, D.C. to account for these issues. In
addition, hard copies of the DEIS have been made available only
in a very limited manner, which is not consistent with the goal
of NEPA to enable public participation. Accordingly, we ask DOS to
hold open the public notice and comment period and hold additional
public hearings and make the DEIS more available, prior to any
final decision on the DEIS.  The Scoping process was also defective
because the Department of State Notice of Intent (“NOI”) failed
to disclose all federal actions that are subject to NEPA review. The
NOI disclosed only that the EIS would address action by the DOS,
Bureau of Land Management (“BLM”), and Montana Department of
Environmental Quality (“MDEQ”). In contrast, the DEIS identifies
nine additional cooperating agencies.23 A number of these agencies have
distinct duties under NEPA that must be fulfilled before taking actions
related the Keystone XL Pipeline, including the Rural Utilities Service
(“RUS”), U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (“USACE”), Western Area
Power Administration (“WAPA”), and the Pipeline and Hazardous
Materials Safety Administration (“PHMSA”).24 However, the NOI did
not state which federal actions the DEIS would review and which will
be reviewed through subsequent NEPA compliance efforts.  For example,
on the face of the NOI it is entirely unclear whether any of the
actions taken by PHMSA would be subject to NEPA review. Since PHMSA
is the only agency, federal or state, responsible for pipeline safety
and pipeline spill prevention, its role in this process is critical,
as is citizen comment on safety-related matters. After issuance of the
NOI and completion of scoping on the Alberta Clipper pipeline, PHMSA
specifically disavowed that any of its actions are subject to NEPA,
with the exception of its decision on the Special Permit.25 Yet the
Keystone XL DEIS Section 1.3.2.10 states that PHMSA is participating
in the DOS NEPA process to “to accomplish their NEPA requirements
through this EIS and is providing technical expertise to DOS in
the assessment of the Project and in determination of appropriate
mitigating 22

Attached as Exhibit 11.  U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA); U.S. Department of the Interior, National Park Service
(NPS); U.S. Department of the Interior, U.S. Fish and Wildlife
Service (USFWS); U.S.  Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources
Conservation Service (NRCS); U.S. Department of Agriculture, Farm
Service Agency (FSA); U.S. Department of Agriculture, Rural Utilities
Service (RUS); U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE); U.S. Department of
Energy, Western Area Power Administration (Western); U.S. Department of
Transportation, Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration
(PHMSA), Office of Pipeline Safety (OPS).  24 Cite to agency NEPA
regulations.  25 Letter, J. Wise, PHMSA, to S. Burt, Earthjustice,
August 10, 2009, attached as Exhibit 11A.  23

measures.” In the same Section, PHMSA states that it will conduct a
separate Environmental Assessment process to meet its NEPA requirements
related to the Special Permit. Further, DEIS Section 1.8 lists
PHMSA’s duties under 49 C.F.R. Parts 194 (related to the project
Emergency Response Plan) and 195 (related to the project Integrity
Management Plan) in Table 1.8-1, Permits, Licenses, Approvals,
and Consultation Requirements for the Proposed Project.  However,
this table does not make clear which agencies are participating
strictly in an advisory capacity and which are participating to
fulfill their independent legal obligations to comply with NEPA
during the course of agency decision making. Absent such clarity,
it is not possible for citizens to understand the obligations of
the involved federal agencies and opportunities for comment on the
impacts of specific agency actions, alternatives to specific agency
actions, and mitigation measures that might be adopted by agencies
with regard to their specific actions.  The proposed project is
not a federal action, but a private action aspects of which are
subject to federal approval. Further, the DOS’s obligation to
comply with NEPA arises separately from the obligations of other
agencies to comply with NEPA. The NOI’s failure to disclose all
federal agencies that intended to seek compliance with NEPA through
the EIS and the nature of the specific federal actions related to
the Pipeline that are subject to review under NEPA mean that it was
not possible for citizens to provide meaningful scoping comments on
the full range of federal actions at issue here, including impacts,
alternatives, and mitigation measures related to each of these actions.
It should be a simple thing to identify which federal actions are
subject to NEPA review and which are not so that scoping comments
on impacts, alternatives, and mitigation measures of these federal
actions are possible. Absent clarity about which federal actions
will be reviewed by the EIS, it is entirely possible for citizens
to believe that agencies will take subsequent or additional NEPA
review beyond this EIS process, just as is planned by PHMSA with
regard to the Special Permit. The DOS’s failure to issue a legally
sufficient NOI resulted in a series of procedural errors during the
scoping process that have now cascaded into a whole defective DEIS.
In addition, our supplemental scoping comments raised the issue that
the DOS failed to adequately identify potential alternative routes
in the preparation of its scoping notice as required by 22 C.F.R. §
161.8(d)(1) which incorporates the definition of “notice of intent”
contained in 40 C.F.R. § 1508.22 by reference. In relevant part, the
definition of “notice of intent” states: “The [notice of intent]
shall briefly: (a) Describe . . . possible alternatives . . . .”
40 C.F.R. § 1508.22 (emphasis added). Due to the use of the word
“shall,” the DOS is required by law to identify alternatives in
its notice of intent, should any alternatives be “possible.”
In its January 28, 2009 Notice of Intent the DOS did not identify
a single alternative of any type to the proposed pipeline, such as
alternative means of acquiring crude oil supply, alternative means of
addressing crude oil demand by reducing demand, alternative routes
for the proposed pipeline, alternative means of transportation such
as rail transportation, or any alternatives related to specific
agency actions, such as alternative border crossings; alternative
import volumes; alternative river, stream, and wetlands crossing
locations or designs; alternative transmission line configurations;
or alternative Emergency Response Plan or Integrity

Management Plan conditions. Such failures violate not only
the DOS’s scoping obligations under NEPA, but the independent
obligations of other agencies to provide for adequate scoping.
With regard to possible alternative routes, a number of possible
alternative routes were identified by TransCanada itself in its
Montana Major Facility Siting Act application, which TransCanada
filed with the State of Montana approximately a month before the
DOS published its Notice of Intent. In addition, this comment letter
discusses additional possible alternative routes that parallel other
interstate pipelines. A modest effort on the DOS’s part would
have disclosed these additional routes.  This being said, the NOI
should have made clear the limits on federal authority with regard
to routing crude oil pipelines. Specifically, no federal agency
has general authority to site or route a pipeline. Instead, federal
routing authority is limited to the DOS’s authority to determine
the location of border crossings and the USACE authority to specify
the location of crossings of navigable waters. Absent clarity about
the scope of federal authority and corresponding descriptions of
alternative routes based on this limited federal authority, it was
not possible for citizens to understand the practicality or viability
of alternative routes.  The DOS’s failure to identify possible,
practical, and viablealternative routes in its Notice of Intent
violates 40 C.F.R. § 1508.22. The result of this violation is that
landowners and communities along these possible alternative routes have
had no notice or opportunity to participate in the scoping process and
provide input into the contents of the DEIS, which must consider these
alternative routes. Due to this defect in scoping, the DEIS will not
be informed by public comment on the scope of its analysis of these
alternative routes, such that the DEIS itself will be defective. To
remedy this violation of law, the DOS must re-issue its scoping notice
to include a description of possible alternative routes, including
potential routes of possible lateral lines transporting Montana crude
to the main Keystone XL pipeline, allow public scoping comments by
potentially impacted landowners, individuals, and communities, and
hold appropriately located scoping hearings.  D.

Need for a Programmatic EIS

The CEQ Regulations implementing NEPA advise that when preparing
environmental impact statements on broad actions, agencies should
consider using programmatic analyses to avoid redundant analyses and
effectively address cumulative effects. See 40 C.F.R. § 1502.4(c).
The Keystone XL project is one of at least three recent international
and multi-state pipelines being permitted by the State Department
to increase petroleum transportation services from the crude oil
supply in the Western Canadian Sedimentary Basin to refineries
in the U.S.  Midwest and the Gulf (the others being the Keystone
and Alberta Clipper projects). These pipeline programs include
many related projects in various stage of development. Because
these pipelines have relevant similarities, such as common timing,
impacts, alternatives, methods of implementation and subject matter,
a programmatic EIS would be useful, and is necessary, to understand
the cumulative and future impacts of this new network of pipelines
and associated infrastructure. Specifically, it is also clear that
the Keystone Pipeline, Keystone Pipeline Extension, and Keystone XL
pipeline are so intertwined both in design and operation that they

should have been reviewed through a programmatic EIS. It made no sense
whatsoever to conduct a NEPA process for the Keystone Extension and
Keystone XL Pipelines, since that are elements of a single pipeline
and neither segment alone is economically or operationally viable.
Accordingly, we request a programmatic EIS be prepared and taken into
account in the Keystone XL EIS, before a final decision is rendered
in regards to the Keystone XL project.  III.

THE DRAFT EIS PROVIDES NO EVIDENCE THAT THE APPROVAL OF THE KEYSTONE
XL PIPELINE IS IN THE NATIONAL INTEREST.

In accordance with Executive Order 13337, issuance of a Presidential
Permit for a transboundary pipeline requires the Department
of State, in consultation with a number of other agencies, to
determine whether granting such a permit would “serve the national
interest.”26 Unfortunately, the DEIS appears to uncritically accept
TransCanada’s claim that there is a need for the project, abdicating
the Department’s responsibility to independently determine if the
pipeline is in the national interest. More analysis and a clearer
process is necessary to allow the Department and other agencies to
make a reasoned determination concerning whether approval of the
permit would serve the national interest.  Specifically, the State
Department has not provided transparent criteria and process for making
a national interest determination. The State Department should wait and
conduct the national interest determination analysis with inter-agency,
tribal and public input after the environmental impact statement is
finalized so that assessments can be fully integrated. In determining
whether or not this pipeline is in the national interest, DOS should
examine the purpose of the pipeline and its place in national energy
and climate goals.  The Keystone XL pipeline is detrimental to climate
security goals and, as is shown elsewhere in these comments, is not
necessary to meet U.S. demand. The pipeline will mean expansion of
tar sands oil production and use, undermining U.S. clean energy and
climate goals and harming the environment and public health. The
Keystone XL pipeline is not in the national interest.  A.

The State Department Has Not Provided Transparent Criteria and Process
for Making a National Interest Determination.

The draft environmental impact statement (DEIS) for the Keystone
XL pipeline does not provide analysis of the national interest, and
there has been very little opportunity for the public to address the
U.S. national interest in the pipeline.27 The DOS Presidential Permit
review process is wholly inadequate and illegal, both with regard to
the substance of the factors to be considered by the DOS and its review
process. In meetings, State Department officials informally encouraged
use of the comments on the DEIS to also provide comments on the

Executive Order (EO) 11423 (33 Federal Register [FR] 11741) as
amended by EO 12847 (58 FR 29511) and EO 13337 (69 FR 25299).  27 See,
e.g., 73 Fed. Reg. 65,713 (Nov. 4, 2008) (providing a 30-day public
comment period upon receipt of the Presidential Permit application
in late 2008).  12

national interest determination, 28 but such informal process is
not legally sufficient for a decision of this importance and nature.
Executive Order 13337 sets out that a national interest determination
shall be made in consultation with other government agencies and tribal
governments, and that there may be a process for public comment. It
also states that the Secretary of State – not the President –
may issue rules and regulations and prescribe procedures deemed
necessary or desirable to exercise the authority conferred. Instead
of issuing “rules and regulations” and prescribed procedures,
the Secretary has instead created an entirely informal, ad hoc, and
confusing process in violation of the Administrative Procedures Act
and the language of Executive Order 13337 itself.29 Apparently due to
its ad hoc process, the Department of State seems to have incorrectly
conflated the comment process on the DEIS with the comment process
that should exist for the national interest determination as set out
in sections 1 and 3 of the Executive Order.30 The DOS’s failure
to properly and legally promulgate rules pursuant to Executive
Order 13337 has resulted in a very confused public process with
entirely unclear procedural and substantive standards. In contrast,
both the Department of Energy and the Federal Regulatory Commission
have promulgated regulations, pursuant to Administrative Procedure
Act notice and comment requirements, which govern applications for
Presidential Permits for high voltage transmission lines and natural
gas pipelines, respectively.31 The DOS must do no less.  The Department
of State should conduct the EIS process under NEPA and, separately,
a national interest determination under the Executive Order. The
national interest determination should include adequate time and
clear and transparent procedures for interagency, tribal government
and public comment.32 The agency, tribal government and public comment
and consultation concerning the national interest determination should
have the benefit of the analysis and assessments in the environmental
impact statement. The agency, tribal government and public comment
and consultation should also have the benefit of a draft scoping of
what will 28

Personal communication, Brian Duggan, Department of State, May
12, 2010.  See, e.g., Part V of these comments.  30 An April 20,
2010 email from Brian Duggan, Department of State, in response to
a request to extend the DEIS comment period from 45 to 90 days,
stated that “we must finalize the EIS after the 90 day window
for interagency comments. Continuing to receive and properly review
comments from the public on day 89 would preclude timely action on
finalizing the EIS.” However, the NEPA process – including the
public comment period – and the national interest determination
process – including the 90 day window for agency comments –
prescribed in the Executive Order are entirely separate, although a
comprehensive Environmental Impact Statement should be a tool available
for informing the national interest determination.  Furthermore, the
EIS is not required to be finalized immediately after 90 days and in
fact, many projects have DEIS comment periods of 90 days or more.
31 18 C.F.R. § 153.15; 62 F.R. 30435 (June 4, 1997); 10 C.F.R. §
205.320 et seq.; 45 Fed. Reg, 71558 (October 28, 1980).  32 Public
comment on the determination of national interest is neither barred
nor explicitly required in the Executive Order. However, we believe
it is a critical component of this determination.  29

be included in the national interest determination, the assessments
and research upon which the national interest determination will
be based and the Department of State’s preliminary conclusions
regarding the determination of national interest.  In addition
to the presidential permit, a number of other federal, state, and
local requirements exist for the pipeline to be built. The process
for considering the application and meeting the requirements is not
well coordinated and provides little public transparency. These other
requirements include: •

•

•

•

Right-of-way Grants and Temporary Use Permits from the Department of
Interior Bureau of Land Management. The BLM “considers approval of
ROW grant and temporary use permits for the portions of the Project
that would encroach on public lands.”33 Clean Water Act Section
404 permits for stream and wetlands crossings from the Army Corps
of Engineers. The Corps “Considers issuance of Section 404 permits
for the placement of dredge or fill material in Waters of the U.S.,
including wetlands.”34 Historic and cultural review under Section 106
of the National Historic Preservation Act to be carried out by multiple
agencies. These agencies are “Responsible for compliance with Section
106 of NHPA and consultation with interested Tribal agencies.”35
State and local approvals for siting, pollution discharge permits,
floodplain permits, state highway crossings and pump station zoning
among others; the agencies involved in these processes vary from
state to state as do the requirements.

The complete listing of permits required can be found in Table 1.8-1
of the DEIS. All of these permitting processes should be coordinated
so that the analysis, assessment, agency review, tribal government
consultation, and public comment regarding the national interest
determination can benefit from a full understanding of the various
permits, waivers, conditions and other assessments concerning the
pipeline.  B.

In Determining Whether or Not this Pipeline Is in the National
Interest, the Commenting Agencies Should Have the Benefit of the
Final Environmental Impact Statement.

The DEIS is the main document that has been provided to agencies in
helping to make their assessment about whether the Keystone XL tar
sands pipeline is in the national interest. A draft document should
not be the basis of national interest determination. In this case,
the DEIS is inadequate and, as outlined in other sections of these
comments, does not adequately address the environmental and health
impacts from the pipeline and related projects. It is critical that
the agencies, tribes and members of the public providing input into
the national interest determination have the benefit of a final
environmental impact statement and the comments that were submitted
on the DEIS as well as the State Department’s response as to how
it has handled those comments.

DEIS at 1-19, tbl. 1.8-1.  Id.  35 Id.  34

C.

In Determining Whether or Not this Pipeline is in the National
Interest, DOS Should Examine the Purpose of the Pipeline and Its
Place in National Energy and Climate Goals.

The DEIS does not adequately lay out the case for why the Keystone
XL tar sands pipeline is needed to help the United States meet its
national energy and climate goals.  TransCanada argues that the
project would serve these interests “by providing a secure and
reliable supply of Canadian crude oil to meet the growing demand
by refineries and markets in the US.”36 But nowhere does the DEIS
provide the analysis to back up this assertion. In fact, contrary to
TransCanada’s assertions, the evidence suggests that construction
of the Keystone XL Pipeline would be detrimental to our country’s
national interests in building a clean energy economy, curbing climate
change, and reducing national reliance on oil.  To curb global warming,
we need dramatic cuts in carbon pollution across all sectors of the
economy, including the oil-dependent transportation sector. Expanding
the use of energy feedstocks that increase carbon pollution is
inconsistent with actions to protect the climate. As part of the
Copenhagen Accord, the United States committed to greenhouse gas (GHG)
emissions reductions of 17 percent below 2005 levels by 2020, and noted
that “The pathway set forth in pending legislation would entail a 30%
reduction in 2025 and a 42% reduction in 2030, in line with the goal to
reduce emissions 83% by 2050.37 To meet the required reduction targets,
the transportation sector, which is now responsible for 30 percent
of global warming pollution in the United States, must make massive
reductions in GHG emissions and those reductions are only possible
by cutting oil consumption and transitioning to low-carbon fuels.
The national interest determination needs to take into account that
expansion of tar sands oil takes the nation in the wrong direction
in terms of emissions and undermines the economics of clean energy
alternatives that would reduce American dependence on oil. On average,
over the full life-cycle, GHG emissions from tar sands-derived fuel
are about 20 percent greater than conventional petroleum fuels.38 In
the case that the Keystone XL pipeline is approved and built 36

Application of TransCanada Keystone Pipeline, L.P. for a
Presidential Permit Authorizing the Construction, Operation,
and Maintenance of Pipeline Facilities for the Importation
of Crude Oil to be Located at the United States-Canada Border,
pg. 1, available at http://www.entrix.com/keystone/xlapp.pdf (last
visited June 29, 2010), and attached as Exhibit 12.  37 Letter from
Todd Stern, U.S. Special Envoy for Climate Change to Yvo de Boer,
Executive Secretary, UNFCCC, January 28, 2010, Appendix 1, available at
http://www.usclimatenetwork.org/resource-database/us-inscription-to-the-unfccc-on-thecopenhagen-accord
(last visited June 29, 2010), and attached as Exhibit 13.  38 Simon
Mui, Luke Tonachel, Bobby McEnaney, and Elizabeth Shope. Greenhouse
Gas Emissions of High Carbon Intensity Crude Oils. Natural Resources
Defense Council, 2010, attached as Exhibit 14. A review of available
literature indicates that emissions for tar sands produced using
surface mining results in 8 to 19% greater emissions (101-111 g
CO2/MJ) than the U.S. 2005 average gasoline baseline (93 g CO2/MJ),
whereas in-situ methods of tar sands production result in 16 to 37%
greater emissions (108 to 128 g CO2/MJ); Pembina Institute, Fact 15

to its 900,000 bpd capacity, and the Enbridge Alberta Clipper and
TransCanada Keystone pipelines are expanded and filled to capacity, the
United States would have the capacity to import over 3 million barrels
per day (mbd) of tar sands.39 The increased emissions would offset
nearly three-quarters of the GHG emissions reductions projected under
the recently finalized car and light truck GHG regulations in 2020.40
The vehicle GHG rules are a centerpiece of the Obama Administration
climate and energy strategy.41 The national interest determination
needs to consider scenarios where U.S. policies reduce the dependence
on oil. In these scenarios, dramatic GHG emission reductions over the
next 20 years are technically feasible. Most of the technologies used
to cut emissions also reduce fuel consumption and the need for oil,
especially high carbon tar sands that increase emissions.  According to
a recent analysis by the EPA, the U.S. can cut transportation sector
emissions by nearly 1 billion tons and reduce sector oil consumption
by 6.7 mbd, or 42% from projected demand in 2030.42 This would be
achieved with a combination of support for higher efficiency new cars,
improved fuel economy standards, advanced biofuels, smart growth and
transit, electric vehicles and air travel improvements, and other
policies and technologies. In 2020, the same analysis estimates
reduced oil consumption of approximately 2.3 mbd, which is more than
the United States imported from Saudia Arabia and Venezuela in 2009.
The national interest determination should include analysis of what
it will take to accomplish these fossil fuel demand reduction goals
and what types of barriers expansion of tar sands imports into the
United States would pose. For example, more than twenty states are

Sheet: Oil Sands Fever- The untold story, pg. 2, available at
http://pubs.pembina.org/reports/OSF_Fact72.pdf (last visited June 8,
2010), and attached as Exhibit 27.  39 According to the April 2010 IHS
CERA report The Role of Canadian Oil Sands in US Oil Supply, “US
total crude oil imports from Canada were 1.9 mbd, and the Canadian
oil sands alone contributed half of this supply.” Available at
http://www2.cera.com/Oil_Sands_SR_042110.pdf (last visited June 29,
2010), and attached as Exhibit 15. This implies that the U.S. currently
imports 950,000 bpd of tar sands. Keystone capacity will ultimately
be 590,000 bpd. The Enbridge Alberta Clipper has an ultimate capacity
of 800,000 bpd. And TransCanada has requested a permit for 900,000 bpd
for Keystone XL. The sum of these numbers is 3.24 mbd.  40 EPA, NHTSA,
“Light-Duty Vehicle Greenhouse Gas Emission Standards and Corporate
Average Fuel Economy Standards; Final Rule”, 75 Fed. Reg. 25324 (May
7, 2010). In 2020, the GHG reductions from the new GHG/CAFE rule are
156 MMT (Table III.F.1-1.). Assuming a 20% increase in GHG emissions
from tar sands, 3 mbd results in about 115 MMT. 115/156 = 74%.
41 Remarks by the President at Signing of Presidential Memorandum
on Fuel Efficiency Standards, Rose Garden, May 21, 2010, available at
http://www.whitehouse.gov/the-pressoffice/remarks-president-signing-presidential-memorandum-fuel-efficiency-standards
(last visited June 29, 2010), and attached as Exhibit 16.
42 EPA, “EPA Analysis of the Transportation Sector:
Greenhouse Gas and Oil Reduction Scenarios,” March 18, 2010,
www.epa.gov/otaq/climate/publications.htm (last visited June 29,
2010), and attached as Exhibit 16A.  16

considering similar policies to the California Low Carbon Fuel
Standard (LCFS).43 Increased reliance on carbon-intense tar sands oil
makes enacting and implementing such standards at the federal and state
level more difficult. Both the industry with vested interest in the
tar sands and the Canadian government are working against adoption
of such policies. Alberta’s Minister of Environment recently
traveled to Boston to urge against adoption of a LCFS there.44 And
Canada’s Minister of Natural Resources, Lisa Raitt, wrote a letter to
Governor Schwarzenegger detailing their opposition to the California
LCFS.45 The national interest determination should also look at the
U.S. interest in climate security and analyze to what extent expansion
of tar sands oil extraction and use worsens global climate change,
which creates security threats. There is a growing sentiment in the
security community that energy policy should fully align with climate
policy.46 As (Retired) U.S. Navy Vice Admiral Dennis McGinn testified
before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee: [W]e cannot pursue
energy independence by taking steps that would contradict our emerging
climate policy. Energy security and a sound response to climate change
cannot be achieved by pursuing more fossil fuels. Our nation requires
diversification of energy sources and a serious commitment to renewable
energy. Not simply for environmental reasons – for national security
reasons.47 And (Retired) Vice Admiral Lee Gunn made a similar point:
Addressing the consequences of changes in the Earth’s climate is not
simply about saving polar bears or preserving the beauty of mountain
glaciers. Climate change is a threat to our national security. Taking
it head on is about preserving our way of life.48 43

California Low Carbon Fuel Standard. Executive Order S-01-07,
available at http://www.energy.ca.gov/low_carbon_fuel_standard/
(last visited June 29, 2010), and attached as Exhibit
16B.  44 Consumer Energy Alliance, Alberta’s Environment
Minister Tells Audience of the Perils of an LCFS, June 14, 2010,
http://consumerenergyalliance.org/2010/06/alberta%e2%80%99senvironment-minister-tells-boston-audience-of-the-perils-of-an-lcfs/
(last visited June 29, 2010), attached as Exhibit 16C.
45 Lisa Raitt Letter to Governor Schwarzenegger, April 21, 2009,
http://www.canadainternational.gc.ca/washington/eventsevenements/LCFS_Raitt.aspx?lang=eng
(last visited June 29, 2010), attached as Exhibit 16D.  46 CNA,
“Powering America’s Defense: Energy and the Risks to National
Security,” May 2009 attached as Exhibit 17.  47 Statement of
Vice Admiral Dennis McGinn, USN, Retired, Member, Military Advisory
Board, CNA, before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee Hearing
on “Climate Change and Global Security: Challenges, Threats, and
Global Opportunities,” Washington, DC, July 21, 2009, attached as
Exhibit 18.  48 Statement of Vice Admiral Lee F. Gunn, USN, Retired,
President, American Security Project, before the Senate Foreign
Relations Committee Hearing on “Climate Change and Global Security:
Challenges, Threats, and Global Opportunities,” Washington, DC,
July 21, 2009 attached as Exhibit 19.  17

Military leaders have warned that climate change is a “threat
multiplier for instability in the most volatile areas of the
world.”49 Climate change is likely to lead to rising sea levels,
increased drought, shifting disease vectors and extreme weather events
that could destabilize the world’s most fragile regions. The Center
for Naval Analysis notes that growing desperation among affected
populations will increase the likelihood of military conflict.50
These conflicts could emerge in strategically significant regions,
requiring U.S. intervention.  Climate change could also contribute
to humanitarian crises that would strain U.S.  military and economic
resources. In May 2009, the Global Humanitarian Forum estimated that
climate change already is responsible for 300,000 deaths per year and
affects more than 300 million people. By 2030, the affected population
will exceed 600 million.51 The National Intelligence Council notes that
“demands for potential humanitarian responses may significantly tax
U.S. military transportation and support force structures, resulting
in a strained readiness posture and decreased strategic depth for
combat operations.”52 Given the security threats posed by climate
change, it is essential that the U.S. avoid becoming dependent on new
high-carbon fuels. This is a critical point for a national interest
determination in building this pipeline.  D.

The Keystone XL Pipeline is Not Necessary to Meet U.S. Demand

The purpose of the proposed pipeline is to increase imports of
synthetic crude oil from the Western Canadian Sedimentary Basin
(“WCSB”) into the United States and to transport this oil to
refineries on the Gulf Coast. However, despite TransCanada’s
claims that the addition of Keystone XL is dictated by increasing
U.S. demand and is therefore in the national interest, the reality
is that TransCanada is proposing the construction of a new pipeline
despite the fact that, with the recent completion of the Enbridge
Alberta Clipper and TransCanada Keystone pipeline, significant excess
pipeline capacity already exists.53 In addition to concerns about the
ability of suppliers to fill the pipeline, there are serious questions
as to the need for the Pipeline, the impact on U.S. pipeline rates
of adding this excess pipeline capacity, the impact on U.S. gasoline
prices of high-cost tar sands oil in the domestic production system,
and other urgent economic questions that the DEIS addresses scantly or
not at all. These questions are critical to answer in the Final EIS,
and before making a determination of national interest.  49

CNA, “National Security and the Threat of Climate Change,”
2007 attached as Exhibit 20.  CNA, “Powering America’s Defense:
Energy and the Risks to National Security,” May 2009 attached as
Exhibit 17.  51 Global Humanitarian Forum, “The Anatomy of a Silent
Crisis,” 2009, attached as Exhibit 21.  52 Statement of Dr. Thomas
Fingar, Chairman of the National Council, before the Permanent House
Select Committee on Intelligence and the House Select Committee
on Energy Independence and Global Warming, June 25, 2008, attached
as Exhibit 22.  53 Nathan VanderKlippe, Oil Sands Awash in Excess
Pipeline Capacity, The Globe and Mail, Apr. 23, 2010, available at
http://www.theglobeandmail.com/report-on-business/industrynews/energy-and-resources/oil-sands-awash-in-excess-pipeline-capacity/article1543726/
(last visited June 8, 2010), and attached as Exhibit 23.  50

At a time of economic recession, the U.S. cannot afford to make
ill-informed and illadvised energy infrastructure investments. The cost
– including opportunity cost – of building unneeded oil pipeline
infrastructure across the length of the U.S. to an expensive, highly
greenhouse gas (GHG) intensive, foreign source of oil is too high
to be tolerated. The proposed pipeline does not further the national
interest, but instead increases TransCanada’s share of the high fees
that are paid by oil producers and refiners to pipeline operators.54
If the Keystone XL pipeline is approved, it is estimated that when
it opens, crude oil pipelines from Canada to the United States will
be running 41 percent empty.55 E.

The Keystone XL Pipeline Is Not in the National Interest

If a proper analysis was carried out of factors connected with
the Keystone XL pipeline pertaining to the national interest of
the United States, we believe that the U.S. government would decide
that this pipeline is not in the national interest. However, because
the DEIS relies primarily on TransCanada’s arguments for building
the pipeline, there is not sufficient analysis to evaluate serious
increased environmental and health impacts associated with increased
tar sands extraction, transportation, and refining. As noted elsewhere
in the comments, the DEIS also underplays and neglects many of the
greenhouse gas emissions associated with tar sands production. Were
these emissions to be fully accounted for, it would be clear that this
pipeline, as well as tar sands development more generally, runs counter
to national energy and climate goals and will exacerbate the national
security threat of increased climate change. By the time this pipeline
would likely be filled, the United States should be well on its way
to achieving oil savings that make this pipeline at best unnecessary.

TransCanada is currently facing three law suits by oil production
and refinery companies claiming that TransCanada made false and
misleading statements about the tolls that would be charged to those
who ship oil on its Keystone pipeline. See, e.g., Statement of Claim,
Sinclair Oil v. TransCanada Keystone Pipeline Gp. Ltd. (Action
0901-15188), filed Oct. 8, 2009, attached as Exhibit 24. The
toll structure of TransCanada’s pipelines is such that the
company passes the vast majority of both fixed and variable
costs directly on to the companies contracting for shipping
services. See DBRS, Press Release, DBRS Confirms TransCanada
Keystone at R-1 (low), Stable Trend (Dec. 15, 2009) available at
http://www.dbrs.com/research/230911/transcanada-keystone-pipeline-lp/dbrs-confirms-tran
(last visited June 8, 2010), and attached as Exhibit 25. Thus,
an increase in pipeline capacity resulting in a pipeline running
partially empty does not significantly affect TransCanada’s
bottom line, but passes on the higher cost per barrel of crude
oil transported to the contracting parties. Increasing pipeline
capacity can thus grow TransCanada’s market share despite being
harmful to the other companies who have contracted to ship oil on
their pipelines.  55 Nathan VanderKlippe, Oil Sands Awash in Excess
Pipeline Capacity, The Globe and Mail, Apr. 23, 2010, available at
http://www.theglobeandmail.com/report-on-business/industrynews/energy-and-resources/oil-sands-awash-in-excess-pipeline-capacity/article1543726/
(last visited June 8, 2010), and attached as Exhibit 23.  19

IV.

THE DEIS DOES NOT ADEQUATELY CONSIDER THE PROJECT’S IMPACTS,
ALTERNATIVES, AND PURPOSE AND NEED, VIOLATING NEPA AND OTHER
STATUTES A.

Statement of Purpose and Need

DOS must evaluate the purpose and need for the project using unbiased
and accurate information to assess the likely future demand for
heavy tar sands crude from Canada. Providing an accurate statement of
purpose and need is a fundamental requirement of environmental review
under NEPA. Simmons v. U.S. Army Corps. of Eng'rs, 120 F.3d 664,
666 (7th Cir. 1997). The agency responsible for conducting the EIS
“bears the responsibility for defining at the outset the objectives
of an action” and “must look hard at the factors relevant to
the definition of purpose.” Citizens Against Burlington, Inc.,
v. Busey, 938 F.2d 190, 196 (D.C. Cir. 1991).  No accurate and reliable
information on likely future demand for tar sands crude oil has been
developed for the Keystone XL DEIS. Without an adequate assessment of
the purpose and need for the project, the entire DEIS is deficient
– the DOS cannot possibly take a “hard look” at alternatives
and balance costs and benefits of the project as it considers the
national interest unless it has first established that the need for
the project as proposed is legitimate. In particular, the failure to
adequately assess purpose and need has led to DOS’s erroneous summary
dismissal of the “no action” alternative without justification.  1.

The DEIS improperly relies on increasing crude oil supply in Canada
to define the project’s purpose instead of examining need for that
crude oil in the U.S.

The DEIS states that the purpose of the Keystone XL project is “to
transport WCSB crude from the border with Canada to existing delivery
points in PADD III that provide connections to existing refineries
in PADD III.” DEIS at 1-3. The DEIS supports the alleged need
for the pipeline by describing projected increases in crude oil
production in the WCSB.  DEIS at 1-5. Canadian oil sands production
forecasts are not relevant to a consideration of whether increased
transportation to the U.S. of tar sands crude oil by the Keystone XL
pipeline is necessary or in the national interest. The need for the
project in the United States must turn on the domestic need for this
crude oil.  The DEIS’s discussion of expanded crude oil production
relies primarily on publications from the Canadian Association of
Petroleum Producers (CAPP), a trade association that “represents
companies…that explore for, develop and produce natural gas and crude
oil throughout Canada. CAPP’s member companies produce about 90 per
cent of Canada’s natural gas and crude oil.”56 CAPP’s mission, as
reported on its website, is to “enhance the economic sustainability
of the Canadian upstream petroleum industry.” Id. It has as a primary
goal to “improve market access, growth and producer netbacks.”
Id. CAPP clearly has as its purpose to increase exploitation of the tar
sands by promoting reliance on tar sands crude, including through 56

See http://www.capp.ca/aboutUs/mission/Pages/default.aspx#fcKyFLsqo6GF
(last visited June 8, 2010), attached as Exhibit 28.  20

improving the delivery infrastructure from the tar sands to consumer
markets. CAPP is not an independent or a reliable source of information
about the actual demand and need for tar sands crude in the United
States.  The Draft EIS should not trust the CAPP forecasts because
these forecasts have consistently overestimated development rates in
the tar sands. With regard to next-year forecasts, the CAPP 2008 Report
overestimated 2007 tar sands oil supply growth by approximately 6%,
the CAPP 2009 Report by approximately 9%, and the CAPP 2010 Report by
3%.57 If these year-ahead forecasts consistently overestimate supply
growth, then out-year estimates are even more suspect.  Further, the
CAPP Reports are also not accurate predictors of long-term trends. For
example, the CAPP 2007 Report forecast of tar sands oil supply for
2009 was 21% higher than actual supplies, with the result that this
short two-year forecast grossly over-forecast supply growth.58 Further,
the CAPP Reports’ tar sands production growth rates have also proven
to be far from reality. Tar sands oil supply increased at a steady
linear rate of approximately 99,000 bpd between 2001 and 2009. In
contrast, the CAPP 2007 Report forecast showed a long-term linear
growth rate of 226,000 bpd, the CAPP 2008 Report forecast 198,000 bpd,
the CAPP 2009 Report forecast 131,000 bpd, and the 2010 Report forecast
136,000 bpd.59 All of these forecasts are substantially higher than
the historical rate. Put another way, the CAPP 2010 Report forecasts
a long-term growth rate 37% higher than the actual historical growth
rate, despite that fact that there is no statistical indication that
actual supply growth rate is increasing.  It is clear that the CAPP
Reports are heavily biased towards rosy growth scenarios and cannot
serve as a reasonable basis for forecasted growth in development in
the tar sands oil supplies. Thus, the Draft EIS cannot use the CAPP
Reports in its alternatives analysis or any market analysis. Instead,
to the extent that the DOS bases its analysis on tar sands supply
increases, the Draft EIS’s forecasts must be based on an independent
forecast. To do otherwise would vest far too much authority in the
Applicant and its industry allies, who cooperate in the development
of the CAPP Reports. A failure to conduct independent forecasts would
violate NEPA and its implementing regulations.  Even if a need for
the U.S. to import more Canadian crude oil could be demonstrated,
historical Canadian heavy crude oil production data show that it is
highly unlikely that production capacity will increase in Canada in
the foreseeable future to a level that a substantial portion of the
Keystone XL Pipeline’s export capacity will be utilized. Canadian
production increased 52,495 barrels per day on average between 1993
and 2009, a period of 16 years.60 This 57

CAPP Forecast Analysis, 2007 to 2010, attached as
Exhibit 26.  Id.  59 Id.  60 National Energy Board of
Canada (NEB) Canadian crude oil export data from website,
http://www.neb.gc.ca/clf-nsi/rnrgynfmtn/sttstc/crdlndptrlmprdct/ttlcrdlxprt-eng.html.
Commenters have not included hard copies of the reports because each
year is available via link 58

increase in production is nearly linear with no indication of any
long-term trend of a greater rate of increase. The highest single-year
increases were 131,000 bpd in 1997 and 127,000 bpd in 2008.61 However,
exports of heavy crude oil actually declined 28,952 barrels per day
between 2008 and 2009.62 If Canadian heavy oil exports increase
at this historical pace, then the export capacity of the already
constructed first Keystone Pipeline and Alberta Pipeline would not
be fully utilized until almost 2036. Even if the rate of increase
accelerated to the single year historical high of 131,000 barrels per
day (and there is no evidence indicating that this will happen), these
existing pipelines would not be fully utilized until almost 2021. There
is simply no empirical evidence that Canada could increase exports to
a point that the export capacity of the Keystone XL pipeline would be
used in a reasonable timeframe.  The tar sands industry is counting
on an entirely infeasible acceleration in Canadian development,
but current evidence indicates that development in the tar sands is
still very slow.  Recently, Royal Dutch Shell, one of the biggest
players in the tar sands, indicated that it did not intend to resume
substantial development in the tar sands until the price of oil is
higher because the cost of development in the tar sands far exceeds
the cost of development in other oil fields.63 The company’s head
of tar sands development stated, “[T]he oil sands have become
one of the most costly places on earth to pursue oil projects.”64
Referring to the company’s recent $14 billion expansion of its tar
sands mining project he said that it represented, “some of the most
expensive production that we have.”65 In comparison, the Manifa
Field in Saudi Arabia is estimated to cost $15.75 billion to develop
and is slated to produce 900,000 bpd of oil, as well as significant
quantities of natural gas and condensate.66 In contrast, Shell’s
expansion in Canada cost $14 billion but only added 100,000 bpd of
crude oil capacity.67 While projects already under construction in
the tar sands are proceeding at a slower pace, for the vast majority
of the projects proposed during the boom years, the development

to separate documents on the website, which is maintained by the
Canadian government.  Commenters wish to have the full reports
made part of the administrative record in this matter.  If DOS
requires hard copies of the reports for purposes of the record,
Commenters will supply them.  61 Id.  62 Id.  63 Shell Puts Oil Sands
Expansion Plans on Hold, GLOBE AND MAIL, Apr. 29, 2010, available at
http://www.theglobeandmail.com/report-on-business/industry-news/energy-and-resources/shellputs-oil-sands-expansion-plans-on-hold/article1550160/
(last visited June 30, 2010) and attached as Exhibit 28A; Lorne
Stockman, Tar Sands Oil Means High Gas Prices, Corporate Ethics
International Research Note, May 6, 2010 (CEI Research Note), Arab
Oil & Gas Magazine, January 2010, Vol. XLVII, attached as Exhibit 28B.
64 CEI Research Note.  65 Id.  66 Id. at 2.  67 Shell Puts Oil Sands
Expansion Plans on Hold, supra note 62.  22

schedule is “TBD” (To Be Determined),68 indicating that
development of these projects is on indefinite hold.  Instead of
relying on government forecasts or historical data, the Applicant
contends that its commercial contracts with U.S. refineries are
sufficient evidence of need for the Keystone XL Pipeline. These
contracts represent the past optimistic judgment of a limited number
of oil industry executives. Moreover, there is every indication
that this judgment was in error.  First, investment in tar sands
extraction infrastructure has declined dramatically, having lost
almost $90 billion in investment over the past few years.69 As noted,
current investments in the tar sands continue to be relatively
low such that a substantial increase in tar sands oil extraction
is entirely speculative.  Second, A number of major oil companies
have stated that the Keystone XL Pipeline is not needed, including
British Petroleum, Imperial Oil, Suncor, and Nexen (Nexen says not
needed until 2020).70 Their statements before the National Energy
Board of Canada represent the judgment of oil company executives that
there is no legitimate commercial need for the Keystone XL Pipeline.
Third, three of TransCanada’s refinery customers sued TransCanada
in Alberta to get out of their contracts to ship 95,000 bpd, based on
the cost overruns.71 These refinery customers argue that TransCanada
should not have proceeded with construction because the costs of
project development were too high.72 If they are held to their
contracts, they seek almost a combined $1 billion in damages.73
All three of these customers are relatively small independent
refineries that may be hard-pressed to absorb the cost overruns and/or
increased costs resulting from underutilization of their contracted
capacities. Construction of the Keystone XL Pipeline will only worsen
their financial condition and put U.S. jobs at risk.  The mere fact
that a limited number of oil companies saw a commercial need for the
Keystone XL pipeline does not mean that such need currently exists
or is likely to exist in the future. A determination of need for the
Keystone XL Pipeline should not be based on past commercial judgments
made during a temporary development boom and the inflated forecasts
of 68

Existing and Proposed Canadian Commercial Oil Sands Projects, Strategy
West, February 2010, attached as Exhibit 28C.  69 Upstream Online,
Athabasca in Canada's Largest IPO, March 31, 2010, available
at http://www.upstreamonline.com/live/article210745.ece
and attached as Exhibit 28D.  70 NEB
Reasons for Decision, OH-1-2009, March 2010, available at
https://www.neb.gc.ca/lleng/livelink.exe/fetch/2000/90464/90552/418396/550305/604643/604441/A1S1E7_-_OH-12009_Reasons_for_Decision.pdf?nodeid=604637&vernum=0
(last visited June 30, 2010) and attached as Exhibit 28E.  71
Pipeline Fee Revolt Widens, GLOBE AND MAIL, Apr. 27, 2010, available at
http://www.theglobeandmail.com/report-on-business/pipeline-fees-revoltwidens/article1548807/?cmpid=rss1
(last visited June 30, 2010) and attached as Exhibit 28F.  72 Id.
73 Id.  23

Canadian oil industry boosters. The DOS’s determination must be
based on an independent forecast prepared for the DOS that examines
future U.S. crude oil demand made in light of realistic Canadian export
forecasts. Anything less abdicates critical federal responsibility
to selfinterested private companies.  2.

US consumption of petroleum-based fuels will remain flat to 2030.  a.

The EIA’s energy demand forecasts.

The US Energy Information Administration (EIA), the statistical
and analytical agency within the U.S. Department of Energy, is an
independent source of projections of US energy demand. According
to it’s website, the EIA: collects, analyzes, and disseminates
independent and impartial energy information to promote sound
policymaking, efficient markets, and public understanding of energy
and its interaction with the economy and the environment. EIA is
the Nation’s premier source of energy information and, by law,
its data, analyses, and forecasts are independent of approval by any
other officer or employee of the United States Government.74 The EIA
provides both short-term forecasts, published monthly, and long-term
forecasts, published annually. The long-term forecasts are called the
Annual Energy Outlook (AEO). The 2008, 2009 and 2010 EIA publications
forecast demand for energy resources, including crude petroleum,
out to 2035.  The EIA forecasts, while independent and non-biased,
are limited by EIA’s statutory obligation to consider only existing
laws and regulations. By law, EIA is prohibited from factoring in the
likely effects future laws and regulations may have on energy demand,
even when, as now, it is clear that federal (and state) laws will be
enacted over the horizon of the EIA forecasts that will dramatically
affect demand for certain types of energy. EIA makes this limitation
of the forecasts very clear in its publications: Projections in AEO
2010 generally assume that current laws and regulations affecting
the energy sector remain unchanged throughout the projection period
(including the implication that laws which include sunset dates do,
in fact, become ineffective at the time of those sunset dates). The
potential impacts of pending or proposed legislation, regulations,
and standards—or of sections of legislation that have been enacted
but that require regulations for which the implementing agency will
exercise major discretion, or require appropriation of funds that
are not provided or specified in the legislation itself—are not
reflected in the Reference case projections.

http://tonto.eia.doe.gov/abouteia/mission_overview.cfm (last visited
June 8, 2010), attached as Exhibit 29.  24

AEO 2010, p. 6.75 See also AEO 2009, p. 8 (“[T]he projections in AEO
2009 are based on Federal and State laws and regulations as of November
2008.) In other words, the AEO’s projections of future demand for
crude oil out to 2035 do not reflect any possible or likely changes in
state or federal law or regulation that may affect future demand.  b.

EIA forecasts do not show increased demand for crude oil.

Citing the EIA’s AEO 2009, the DEIS states that “the volume
of crude oil consumed … domestically, is unlikely to decrease
substantially over the next 30 years.” DEIS at 1-4, 4-1.  This
statement is directly contracted by the very source the DEIS cites
in support. In April 2010, EIA published the Annual Energy Outlook
2010, which has more up-to-date forecasts. Neither the AEO 2009 nor
the AEO 2010 show an increase in US demand for crude oil.  The AEO
2010 forecasts zero increase in demand for crude oil in its forecast
to 2035.  See AEO 2010 at 3 (“biofuels account for all the growth in
liquid fuel consumption in the United States over the next 25 years,
while consumption of petroleum-based liquids is essentially flat);
AEO 2009 at 7 (“Total U.S. demand for liquid fuels grows by only
1 million barrels per day between 2007 and 2030…and there is no
growth in oil consumption. …Growth in the use of biofuels meets
the small increase in demand for liquids in the projection.”). As
shown in Figure 1, below, the consumption of fuels from crude oil
is expected to decrease slightly from 20.65 to 20.12 million barrels
per day between 2006 and 2030. In fact, EIA expects that nation-wide
consumption of petroleum-based liquids will have decreased in 2030
by 0.5 million barrels per day compared to 2006. AEO 2009, Table
A11 (2030 figure calculated from total minus E85).  Thus, there is
no ground for the assertion in the DEIS that demand for crude oil
nation-wide, or in PADD III specifically, requires additional supply
of heavy crude from Canada.

Commenters refer to 2008, 2009 and 2010 Annual Energy
Outlook reports from the EIA and the appended tables. The
reports and tables are all available on EIA’s website
at http://www.eia.doe.gov/oiaf/aeo/pdf/0383(2008).pdf,
http://www.eia.doe.gov/oiaf/archive/aeo09/pdf/0383(2009).pdf, and
http://www.eia.doe.gov/oiaf/aeo/pdf/0383(2010).pdf, respectively
(last visited June 8, 2010).  Commenters have not included hard copies
of the reports because they are lengthy and available on a website
maintained by the federal government. Commenters wish to have the full
reports, with appendices, made part of the administrative record in
this matter. If DOS requires hard copies of the reports for purposes
of the record, Commenters will supply them.  25

Figure 1.  By far the largest type of liquid fuel consumed in the
United States is motor gasoline.  Indeed, approximately 50 percent
of the overall liquid fuel consumption, or 9.25 million barrels per
day, is in the form of gasoline. AEO 2009, table A11. US demand for
gasoline derived from crude oil is projected to decrease in the AEO
2009 reference case by 0.7 percent annually. As shown in Figure 2,
current consumption of 9.25 million barrels per day decreases by over
a million barrels per day to 7.97 million barrels per day in 2030.

Figure 2.  In sum, current projections show that demand for
petroleum-based liquid fuels of the type proposed to be delivered in
the Keystone XL pipeline will decrease or remain flat. This is true
even if one assumed no new federal or state laws will be enacted
between now and 2035 that will affect demand for carbon-intensive
fuels.  3.

US dependence on imported petroleum is expected to decline dramatically
over the next 20 years.

In addition to making clear that overall US demand for crude oil will
not increase over the next decades, EIA’s newest forecasts also
explain that US need for imported crude will “decline dramatically”
to 2030. According to EIA’s AEO 2009 the US will require only
6.95 million bpd of imported crude in 2030. AEO 2009, Table A11. The
EIA’s 2009 forecasts predicts a decrease in imports as of 2030 of
more than 3 million barrels of crude per day. Figure 3 below, taken
from the AEO 2009, shows the dramatic decrease EIA is projecting.

Figure 3.  In addition to analyzing and forecasting the need for
imports, the EIA projections also predict the sources of petroleum
to supply expected demand. AEO 2009, Table A11. With regard to crude
oil imports, AEO 2009 reports that the 1.6 million barrels per day
the United States imported from Canada in 2006 will decrease to 1.38
million barrels per day by 2030. This reduction, represented below
in Figure 4, is a 0.7 percent annual decrease in Canadian crude oil
imports according to the EIA. Id.

Figure 4.  The data show that the existing pipeline infrastructure
has sufficient capacity – indeed, more than sufficient capacity
– to meet US demand for Canadian crude for at least the next
two decades. Overall, demand for petroleum-based fuels is flat;
domestic production is expected to increase; and the need for imports
declines dramatically. The assertion that future increased US demand
necessitates a new large pipeline is without evidentiary support.  4.

The EIA forecasts are based on business as usual assumptions; in fact,
demand for tar sands crude will be even lower than projected.

As noted above, a major limitation of the EIA forecasts is the
requirement that EIA ignore any pending or likely future law or
regulation in its modeling. There can be no question that new laws and
regulations will be enacted in coming years that will dramatically
affect the demand for carbon-intensive fuels such as liquid fuel
derived from tar sands. It would be unreasonable for the State
Department to ignore the very likely, indeed certain, regulation
of carbon emissions and the effect such regulation will have on the
purported purpose and need for this project in the DEIS.  a.

State and regional initiatives are underway that will lower demand.

State, regional and federal initiatives are underway that will
dramatically impact demand for tar sands crude in the region of the
pipeline, in PADD III, and nationally. Minnesota, for example, has
enacted statewide greenhouse gas reduction goals requiring reductions
in GHG

emissions below 2005 levels 15 percent by 2015, 30 percent by
2025, and 80 percent by 2050.  Minn. Stat. § 216H.02. Similarly,
Iowa has established a council to develop strategies to reduce
GHG emissions by 50 percent. Iowa C. § 455B.851(7). In Montana,
Gov. Schweitzer established a Climate Change Advisory Committee to
examine state level greenhouse gas reduction opportunities in all
sectors in Montana. Other states have undertaken similar efforts.
See, e.g., Illinois Exec. Order 2006-11 (establishing advisory
council to achieve GHG reductions); Kansas Exec. Order No. 08-03
(establishing advisory group to develop recommendations to reduce
greenhouse gas emissions in Kansas).  States within PADD III have
also undertaken initiatives to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. With
Act 696 of 2008 Arkansas created a Commission on Global Warming that
recommended that Arkansas adopt a statewide global warming pollutant
goal to reduce the state’s gross greenhouse gas emissions below 2000
levels by 20 percent by 2020; 35 percent by 2025; and 50 percent by
2035. These recommendations are currently under review. A New Mexico
Exec. Order 05-33 established a Climate Change Advisory Group to
develop recommendations for reducing New Mexico's total greenhouse
gas emissions to 2000 levels by the year 2012, 10 percent below 2000
levels by 2020, and 75 percent below by 2050.  These states cannot meet
these statutory obligations without significant reductions, over both
the near and long-term, in consumption of carbon-intensive fuels. As
described herein, fuels derived from tar sands are among the most
carbon-intensive of all fuels because of the large amounts of energy
used to extract and upgrade the oil sands. Common sense dictates that
state policymakers committed to significant GHG reductions will pursue
statutory and regulatory requirements that will have the effect of
decreasing demand for carbon-intensive fuels.  In addition to the
state-based policies that will be required to meet states’ GHG
reduction goals, Midwest Governors (Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Michigan,
Ohio, South Dakota, Wisconsin and the Canadian Province Manitoba)
have agreed and committed to a number of specific strategies that
are directly targeted at reducing the demand for fossil fuels. In
November 2007, Midwestern governors signed onto the Energy Security
and Climate Stewardship Platform for the Midwest (the “Midwest
Platform”)76 and the Midwestern Greenhouse Gas Accord (“the
GHG Accord”).77 The Platform, for example, endorses and commits
respective states to implementation of a comprehensive, multi-pronged
approach that includes the following integrated strategies: * * * 4.
Expand on existing biofuels production through the development of a
bio-refinery industry that minimizes GHG emission and produces liquid
fuels, biogas, electricity, heat and bio-products from cellulosic
biomass; 5. Establish a secure, domestic transportation fuel supply and
infrastructure that relies on the region’s sustainable production of
electricity, biofuels, hydrogen and other low- or zerocarbon fuels. *
* * 7 Support the regional development and manufacturing of 76

http://www.midwesterngovernors.org/Publications/EnergyPlatform.pdf
(last visited June 29, 2010), attached as Exhibit 30.  77
http://www.midwesterngovernors.org/Publications/Greenhouse%20gas%20accord_Layout%20
1.pdf (last visited June 29, 2010), attached as Exhibit 31.  30

highly efficient and lower-carbon technologies in vehicles and
equipment, renewable and fossil energy production ….  Midwest
Platform, p. 5. The states also committed to implementing policies
to achieve the goal of having 50 percent of the transportation energy
consumed in the region come from “regionally produced biofuels and
other low-carbon advanced transportation fuels” by 2025. Midwest
Platform, p. 10.  Additionally, many of the Midwestern states have
signed on to a regional effort to establish a “market-based and
multi-sector cap-and-trade mechanism to help achieve GHG reduction
targets” and to “develop and implement other associated mechanisms
and policies as needed to achieve the GHG reduction targets, such as a
low-carbon fuel standard ….” GHG Accord, p. 3. States participating
in the cap and trade accord include Illinois, Iowa, Kansas, Michigan,
Minnesota, Wisconsin, and the Province of Manitoba. Id., p. 4. The
commitment to a Midwest cap-and-trade program that caps and lowers
GHG emissions over time obviously will depress demand for fuel from
tar sands crude because it is carbon-intensive.  Regional efforts to
reduce GHG emissions through binding regulations are further along
in other areas of the country. As DOS is aware, New England states
have established the Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative (RGGI) and
western states the Western Climate Initiative (WCI), both of which
share a goal of achieving GHG reductions.  b.

Federal enactments are certain to lower demand.

More important than any state or regional effort, however, is the
dramatic shift that has occurred at the federal level with the Obama
Administration and a Congress committed to addressing the climate
change crisis.  Significantly, on May 21, 2010, President Obama
ordered the federal government to develop tougher fuel-efficiency
standards for cars and trucks, announcing the creation of a national
policy that will increase efficiency for medium and heavy-duty trucks
for the first time and further increase efficiency for cars and
light-duty trucks.78 Improving the average fuel economy of medium
and heavy trucks, which consume more than 20 percent of the fuel
used in U.S. road transportation, will, by 2030, reduce American oil
consumption by 11 billion gallons per year.79 In addition, Congress
is making progress on comprehensive climate legislation. On June 26,
the U.S. House of Representatives passed the American Clean Energy
and Security Act of 2009, H.R. 2454, by a vote of 219 to 212. This
national climate and energy legislation would 78

Peter Baker, Obama Mandates Rules to Raise Fuel
Standards, NEW YORK TIMES, May 21, 2010, available at
http://www.nytimes.com/2010/05/22/business/energyenvironment/22fuel.html
and attached as Exhibit 31A.  79 Union of Concerned
Scientists press release, May 21, 2010, available at
http://www.ucsusa.org/news/press_release/obama-kickstarts-process-for-fuel-economy0397.html
(last visited June 8, 2010), and attached as Exhibit 31B.  31

establish an economy-wide, greenhouse gas cap-and-trade system and
critical complementary measures to help address climate change and
build a clean energy economy. On May 12, 2010 Senators John Kerry and
Joe Lieberman introduced the American Power Act, which sets concrete
GHG emission reduction targets: 17 percent reduction in U.S. carbon
pollution from 2005 levels by 2020; 42 percent by 2030; and 83
percent by 2050. These new federal laws will have a direct effect on
demand for the crude proposed to be transported through the Keystone
XL pipeline.  One mechanisms to achieve carbon reduction goals that
is being considered by the Obama Administration is the adoption of a
“national low carbon fuel standard.” A low carbon fuel standard
(LCFS) takes into account the well-to-wheels GHG emission associated
with various types of liquid fuels, preferring low-carbon fuels and
penalizing high-carbon fuels.  Under an LCFS policy, fuel derived from
tar sands will be among the least desirable because it is the most
carbon intensive. Figure 6, below, is taken from a study conducted for
the California Air Resources Board in development of California’s
LCFS.80 WTW GHG Emissions for Petroleum Fuels in MidSize Vehicles
(2012 New Vehicle Stock)

Figure 6.  80

The full report is available at
http://www.energy.ca.gov/2007publications/CEC-600-2007004/CEC-600-2007-004-REV.PDF
(last visited June 8, 2010), attached as Exhibit 32.  32

It clearly shows that tar sands fuels for both hybrid electric
(HEV) and internal combustion engine (ICEV) cars have the highest
carbon intensity of the studied options. Thus, a national low carbon
fuel standard, as proposed by the Obama Administration, will further
suppress demand for tar sands crude. An economy-wide cap-and-trade
program will similarly penalize carbon-intensive energy sources such
as fuel derived from tar sands.  These plans to reduce greenhouse
gas emissions build on the provisions of the Energy Independence
and Security Act, which prohibits federal agencies from buying
alternative or synthetic fuels that have higher lifecycle greenhouse
gas emissions than those of conventional fuels.81 The new Energy Act
excludes the large federal government sector from the market for
tar sands oil, further reducing demand for this source.  Finally,
it is clear that the Administration intends to end dependence on
Middle East and Venezuelan imports through reductions in consumption,
not by displacing such imports with imports from the Canadian oil
sands. (As noted above, even without any of the additional savings
achieved through Obama Administration policies, the need for imports
is already expected to decline dramatically.) Thus, even if Canadian
sources were seen as more “secure,” such an assumption does not
establish a need for additional supply capacity from Canada.82 The
changes in federal energy and climate policy will have far-reaching
effects on crude oil consumption. The State Department must re-evaluate
the underpinnings of TransCanada’s request for a new pipeline to
transport an enormous additional amount of the Earth’s dirtiest
oil to the United States. Under current and reasonably foreseeable
future statutory and regulatory frameworks, US will have no need for
increased crude supply, especially not from Canada’s tar sands.
In sum, current EIA projections – assuming no new regulation or
laws affecting carbon emissions are enacted – show that demand
for crude oil is flat and that the need for net imports declines
dramatically over the next two decades. Adding to that the certainty
that state, regional and federal laws will be enacted to confront the
climate change crisis and Americans’ dependence on fossil fuels,
it becomes very clear that there is no objective or reliable demand
forecast that would support the statement of purpose and need in this
DEIS. The State Department cannot ignore policymakers’ commitments to
achieving significant reductions in US consumption of carbon-intensive
fuels over the short- and long-term. The Secretary herself has said
"[w]e will pursue an energy policy that reduces our carbon emissions
while reducing our

Energy Independence and Security Act of 2007, Pub. L. No. 110-140
§ 526, 121 Stat. 1492 (Dec, 19, 2007), 42 U.S.C.A. § 17142
(2007).  82 Commenters believe that security, to the degree it
is considered in the DEIS, must also be weighed in evaluating
the consequences of unchecked climate change. Secretary of State
Clinton agrees that the threat of global climate change is itself
a security issue: “A world in crisis goes well beyond the air
we breathe, the food we eat, the water we drink. It is at once an
environmental, economic, energy and national security issue with
grave implications for America’s and the world’s future.” See
http://www.state.gov/secretary/rm/2009a/01/115409.htm (last visited
June 8, 2010), attached as Exhibit 33.  33

dependence on foreign oil."83 The State Department must issue
a new DEIS that effectively assesses the purpose and need for
TransCanada’s proposed project or, alternatively, abandon these
permitting proceedings altogether based on the clear evidence that
the Keystone XL pipeline will not be needed to meet US demand for
Canadian tar sands crude.  B.

Consideration of Alternatives

The alternatives analysis is the “heart” of an EIS. 40 C.F.R. §
1502.14. The EIS must “provide full and fair discussion of
significant environmental impacts and…inform decisionmakers
and the public of the reasonable alternatives which would avoid
or minimize adverse impacts or enhance the quality of the human
environment.” Id. § 1502.1. An agency must “rigorously explore
and objectively evaluate all reasonable alternatives,” including
the “alternative of no action,” and must “devote substantial
treatment to each alternative...so that reviewers may evaluate
their comparative merits.” Id. The stated purpose and need for a
project necessarily dictates the alternatives to be evaluated. 40
C.F.R. §1502.13. The purpose of the project cannot be defined
so narrowly as to define competing reasonable alternatives out
of consideration. Muckleshoot Indian Tribe v. U.S. Forest Serv.,
177 F.3d 800, 812-14 (9th Cir.  1999).  However, the Keystone XL
Pipeline is a private project, not a federal project. Where NEPA
applies to federal action on private projects, the scope of the
alternative analysis must relate to the scope of federal authority
over the project. Citizens Against Burlington, Inc. v.  Busey,
938 F.2d 190, 197-198 (D.C. Cir. 1991; Natural Resource Defense
Council, Inc. v. U.S.  Environmental Protection Agency, 822 F.2d 104
(D.C. Cir. 1987); Colo. Envtl. Coalition v.  Dombeck, 185 F.3d 1162,
1175 (10th Cir. 1999); N. Buckhead Civic Assoc. v. Skinner, 903 F.2d
1533, 1542 (11th Cir. 1990). Here, the DOS has completely failed
to link its alternatives analysis to particular federal authority.
The Draft EIS attempts to cover alternatives dealing with no action,
system, and major route alternatives. However, the Pipeline is being
proposed in order to fill a perceived future gap in fuel and energy in
the United States. The Pipeline is not the only alternative for filling
this gap: other alternatives include fuel efficiency, alternative
fuels, electric vehicles, other clean transport technologies, and
public transportation. The Draft EIS does not adequately address
alternatives to expanding U.S. capacity to import tar sands oil.
Moreover, the Draft EIS completely fails to examine agency-specific
alternatives, such as alternatives related to river crossings and
wetland fills where alternatives must be developed pursuant to 33
C.F.R. Part 325, App. B, § 7. b, alternative border crossings pursuant
to Executive Order 13337, and alternative means of meeting federal
emergency response planning and pipeline integrity planning pursuant
to 49 C.F.R. Parts 194 and 195. While EIS may not be limited to only
measures that an agency has the authority to adopt, NRDC v Morton,
458 F.2d 83

Remarks made during Secretary Clinton’s confirmation
hearing before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, available at
http://www.cfr.org/publication/18225/transcript_of_hillary_clintons_confirmation_hearing.html
(last visited June 29, 2010), and attached as Exhibit 34.  34

827, 834 (D.C. Cir. 1972), this does not mean that an EIS can ignore
practical alternatives available to specific agencies for their
particular federal actions. The DOS’s responsibility to determine
whether the Keystone XL Pipeline is in the national interest means
that the Draft EIS must evaluate national energy policy alternatives
to meeting energy demand. However, such broad authority does not
excuse the Draft EIS from evaluating alternative embodiments of
particular federal agency permitting decisions, such as Army Corps
wetland and river crossing decisions.  The Draft EIS is defective in
part because its alternatives analysis focuses exclusively on major
policy alternatives without examination of practical, realistic
permit-specific alternatives.  Such 50,000 foot focus means that
the Draft EIS will fail to allow most of the cooperating agencies
fulfill their NEPA duties. Unless the Draft EIS discusses alternatives
relative to specific federal permits and approvals, it will fail to
achieve statutory requirements that each involved agency examine its
alternatives to its particular major federal actions. Such failure
would mean that the Draft EIS would in effect serve as a programmatic
EIS, with the result that cooperating agencies would be required to
conduct subsequent NEPA reviews.  The purpose of this EIS is to provide
an assessment of the environmental impacts if a Presidential Permit for
the proposed project is approved. Presidential Permits, unlike NEPA
analyses, have the burden of looking at not only the narrow field of
traditional NEPA factors, but whether the issuance would “serve the
national interest.”84 Therefore, the Draft EIS’s determination
that a “no action alternative” is not preferable cites to supply
and demand components.  According to the Draft EIS, a “no action
alternative” is not considered preferable because it would not meet
the purpose and need of the project which involves both supply and
demand components. The DEIS argues that it is because of the demand
in the U.S., the supply available in WCSB, the WCSB as a relatively
stable and secure source of North American crude oil for Midwest and
Gulf Coast markets and the desire to reduce our dependence on Middle
Eastern oil supplies that makes this alternative not preferable.
The analysis of national interest only looks at one aspect of how to
meet our energy needs.  It does not consider that unconventional oil
is not the only alternative for our energy future. It also does not
consider the security risks from energy sources that increase our
contributions to global warming pollution.

Executive Order (EO) 11423 (33 FR 11741), as amended
by EO 12847 (58 FR 29511) and EO 13337 (69 FR 25299);
see also US Department of State, Fact sheet: Applying for
Presidential Permits for Border Crossing Facilities (Canada),”
http://www.state.gov/p/wha/rls/fs/2009/114990.htm (last visited June
8, 2010).  35

1.

The DEIS improperly rejects the No Action Alternative without
considering reasonable alternatives to meeting future energy needs
in the US.

In the race to develop Canada’s tar sands region, a significant
obstacle to its growth is the constraint on the pipeline network
moving this crude to markets in the United States. Sections 1.2.2 and
4.1.3 of the DEIS describe how the existing crude oil pipeline export
capacity from the Western Canadian Sedimentary Basin is insufficient
to accommodate the forecasted crude oil supply growth. The Keystone
XL Pipeline is proposed to address this gap, with the possibility
of additional future increases in its capacity, DEIS at 1-3, and to
meet a perceived future energy need in the United States.  However,
the pipeline is not the only alternative for filling this gap:
other alternatives include energy efficiency, renewable energy,
clean technologies, and demand-side management.  NEPA regulations
specifically require consideration of energy requirements
and conservation in environmental review documents. 40 C.F.R §
1502.16(e). Yet the DEIS explicitly declines to consider alternatives
sources of energy, stating that “the use of alternative forms of
energy in place of the proposed Project was not considered in the
environmental review of the Project.” DEIS at 4-1. The only reason
given for this failure is the conclusory assertion that “the use
of alternative forms of energy would not meet the needs of refiners
in PADD III or the purpose of the proposed Project.” This does
not constitute the rigorous exploration and objective evaluation of
reasonable alternatives that NEPA requires.  The purpose of the EIS is
to provide an assessment of the environmental impacts if a Presidential
Permit for the proposed project is approved. Presidential Permits,
unlike NEPA analyses, have the burden of looking at not only the narrow
field of traditional NEPA factors, but whether the issuance would
“serve the national interest.”85 Therefore, the determination in
the Draft EIS that a “no action alternative” is not preferable, the
EIS cites to the need to (1) meet growing demand for oil in the United
States, DEIS at 4-2, and (2) to reduce US dependence on less reliable
foreign oil. DEIS at 1-5 to 1-6; 4-3. In its brief analysis, the State
Department rejects the “no action” alternative because “it would
not meet the purpose and need for the proposed action.” DEIS at 3-2.
However, this analysis of national interest only looks at one aspect of
how to meet our energy needs. It does not consider that unconventional
oil is not the only alternative for our energy future and does not
consider improving energy efficiency and thus reducing demand for oil
as a means to reduce dependence on less reliable foreign oil. It also
does not consider the security risks from energy sources that increase
our contributions to global warming pollution.  These alternatives to
increasing US reliance on dirty fossil fuels are not only reasonable
and feasible, they also better serve the national interest.

Executive Order (EO) 11423 (33 FR 11741), as amended
by EO 12847 (58 FR 29511) and EO 13337 (69 FR 25299);
see also US Department of State, Fact sheet: Applying for
Presidential Permits for Border Crossing Facilities (Canada),”
http://www.state.gov/p/wha/rls/fs/2009/114990.htm (last visited June
8, 2010).  36

2.

The DEIS improperly rejects the No Action Alternative without
considering existing and proposed crude oil pipeline capacity.

In order to weigh the merits of alternatives to the proposed pipeline,
the State Department must clarify what capacity already exists
to meet current and future US demand for crude oil. In addition
to the Keystone XL pipeline, there are numerous other pipelines,
including TransCanada’s own newly constructed Keystone I pipeline,
and Enbridge’s Alberta Clipper pipeline, both of which will
service the purpose of enabling Canadian tar sands crude suppliers
to export increased volumes of crude to the U.S. The Keystone I
pipeline has the capacity to deliver over 590,000 bpd of crude to
PADD III. Alberta Clipper provides capacity for an additional 450,000
bpd. In addition, Enbridge’s Lakehead system has capacity to deliver
2.42 million barrels per day of Canadian crude to the Midwest,86 and
ExxonMobile’s Pegasus pipeline can deliver 96,000 bpd of crude to
the Gulf.  Moreover, the DEIS does not account for other proposed
pipelines that would extend to the Pacific Ocean through Alberta
or the Gulf Coast. For example, Kinder Morgan Canada’s proposed
Chinook Pipeline would deliver 300,000 bpd of Canadian tar sands
heavy crude from Alberta, Canada to the Gulf Coast of Texas beginning
in 2012. Altex has also proposed a 300,000 bpd pipeline along a
similar route. The DEIS must consider the need for the Keystone XL
pipeline in light of these other proposals.  The State Department must
explore what the ultimate capacity of the existing pipeline system is
compared to accurate projections of future liquid fuel consumption
in order to thoroughly evaluate the no action alternative. Without
a clear understanding of the supply delivery capacity of existing
lines, the State Department cannot evaluate whether the no action
alternative is a reasonable choice. An enormous expansion in transport
capacity has already been added to the pipeline systems that serve US
refineries. The DEIS fails to take account of this already-permitted
increase in capacity in its discussion of the purpose and need for
TransCanada’s proposal. It also fails to address this additional
capacity availability in evaluating the no action alternative.  3.

System Alternatives

The Draft EIS’s analysis is defective because it fails to adequately
consider system alternatives related to pipeline size, interconnection
with other pipelines, and the separate utilities of the Steele City and
Gulf Coast Segment alternatives.  NEPA has long required consideration
of alternative size of projects. Here, the evidence indicates that the
Keystone XL Pipeline is oversized. Yet the Draft EIS fails to consider
any alternative pipeline capacities, alternative pipe diameters,
or alternative pipe pressures. Instead the Draft EIS asserts that a
full 900,000 barrels per day of oil flow is needed. Such assumption
prematurely and improperly eliminates consideration of a practical
and commercially viable alternative to the project.  86

Enbridge MN PUC Application, Sect. 7853.0230, p. 12, Docket
No. PLS/CN-07-465, June 2007, attached as Exhibit 35.  37

Also, the Draft EIS fails to consider interconnection options,
such as using capacity on the Enbridge System to bring oil into
the U.S., and then interconnect the Keystone System at that
border crossing. Further, the Draft EIS fails to consider whether
interconnection of the Keystone XL Pipeline to any existing oil
pipelines and terminals north of Cushing, OK, would provide systemic
benefits related to greater flexibility of use than a “bullet”
pipeline to the Gulf Coast.  The Draft EIS fails to consider the
alternative of building only the Gulf Coat Segment, because this would
allow substantial volumes of crude oil to flow between Cushing, OK,
and the Gulf Coast, while maintaining the option of building more
capacity if and when U.S. demand and Canadian extraction capacity are
proven. Suncor Inc. proposed this alternative to in the National Energy
Board proceedings in Canada. Although this option would not provide
as much capacity as TransCanada’s proposal, such capacity is not
needed for the foreseeable future anyway, with the result that the
existing Keystone Pipeline would be used more fully. This alternative
should also be considered in combination with reducing the size of
the Keystone XL Pipeline to match forecasted demand between Cushing,
OK, and the Gulf Coast.  4.

Alternate routes

The central problem with the EIS analysis of alternate routes is
that no U.S. agency at the state or federal level actually has the
authority to change the full pipeline route. The DOS has authority to
determine the location of border crossings, but the DOS has failed
to base its alternatives analysis on the merits of different border
crossing locations. Rather, the Draft EIS assumes that the location of
the border crossing is fixed near the town of Morgan, Montana, when
it is entirely within the President’s foreign affairs authority to
determine the location of the border crossing. Predetermination of
this exercise of discretion violates NEPA. Further, the Army Corps
has authority over the location of river crossings, but this authority
is not equivalent to the authority to approve a route.Further, there
is some jurisdiction within agencies such as the Montana Department
of Environmental Quality to guide route decisions, but even that
authority was abdicated during the application review process (see
below) because the applicants had already chosen a route without
reference to Montana standards. Other states along the route have no
routing authority, except some de minimis discretion at the county
level. Performing an analysis of alternative routes for the purely
theoretical purpose of NEPA review, when no agency has authority
to act on proposed alternatives, is a sham and an abuse of the NEPA
process that gives participants an entirely false impression that their
participation might somehow influence the outcome.  In one instance
of sham review of alternate routes, Montana DEQ collaborated with
the Applicant to invent alternate routes after the proposed route had
already been chosen. To comply with the requirements of the Montana
Major Facilities Siting Act, at Section 4.3 the EIS considers five
alternate routes in Montana. According to the EIS, Keystone did
not appear to examine the preferred Montana routine criteria and
preference for the use of public land until after it had selected
Alternative SCS-B as its proposed route….  Thus, MDEQ worked with
Keystone and the third-party EIS contractor to develop two new

alternatives (the CND and CSD alternatives) in a manner that provided
clear documentation of the steps taken and factors considered,
as indicated in Sections I-2.1 and I-2.3.87 Conveniently, these two
after-the-fact alternate routes were rejected. Development and review
of alternate routes that takes place after the proposed route is
chosen can hardly provide the meaningful consideration of alternatives
required by state and federal law. To the contrary, it is a sham with
no purpose other than to paper over the NEPA, MEPA and MFSA processes.
The EIS also fails to consider existing pipeline routes, including
the route of the recently completed Keystone pipeline, which begins in
Alberta and would require only a relatively short additional section
to reach the Gulf coast. At no point does the EIS attempt to justify
the additional disruption, destruction and risk of an entirely new
pipeline route.  5.

The DEIS fails to consider alternatives that would avoid or minimize
impacts to water resources.

Under the federal Clean Water Act, discharges of pollutants, including
dredged and fill material, are prohibited unless permitted pursuant to
the Act. 33 U.S.C. § 1311(a). In order for discharges of dredged and
fill to be permitted under the Act by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
(Corps or USACE), a “sequencing” analysis must occur. 33 USC §
1344; 40 CFR § 230.10(a). First, impacts to wetlands must be avoided;
then minimized; and finally, to the extent impacts are unavoidable,
compensated. See 33 USC § 1344(b)(1); 40 CFR § 230.10(a). For
non-water dependent projects, CWA regulations do not allow for a permit
to be issued if a practicable alternative to the discharge exists
that would have a less impact on aquatic water resources. 40 CFR §
230.10(a). Mitigation is a last resort to be used only to compensate
for impacts that could not be avoided or minimized.  The DEIS fails
to adequately demonstrate that efforts were properly made to avoid
or minimize wetland, stream and river impacts. As described above,
the DEIS’s acceptance of TransCanada’s stated need for the project
fails to account for projections of stagnant or declining demand for
liquid fossil fuels. The DEIS thus rejects the No Action Alternative
based on this faulty statement of purpose and need. However, the
No-Action Alternative is the practicable alternative with the least
damage to the aquatic environment. Thus, the currently proposed impacts
to hundreds of rivers and streams and several hundred acres of wetlands
should not be permitted under Section 404 and should not be allowed.
System alternatives would also have less impact on water resources
and be practicable. It is possible use of existing pipelines could
meet the need of this project, thus being practicable, and would
avoid and minimize impacts to water resources as required by law.
In terms of pipeline placement, dismissed alternatives would have less
impact on water resources. The “Western Alternative,” is one such
alternative that may be both practicable and less damaging to water
resources. The DEIS admits that “[p]otential positive attributes to
this alternative include the avoidance of the Missouri River crossing
just to the east of the Fort Peck 87

DEIS at I-2.4.2.  39

Reservoir and the avoidance of crossings of reaches of the Niobrara
River that have been included with the federal Wild and Scenic River
program.” DEIS at 4-17. Not mentioned, but also a potential reduction
in impacts to water resources of this more westerly route, is the
avoidance of vital and sensitive prairie potholes generally located in
the more eastern portions of Montana and South Dakota. Additionally,
the preferred Gulf Coast Section alternative (GCS-A) has considerable
more impacts to wetlands than the rejected alternative (GCS-B), which
is only 6 miles longer. DEIS at 4-18, Tbl. 4.3.5-1. GCS-A has more
than 280 acres of impacts than GCSB (853.3 compared to 573.3). The
cited reason for rejected GCS-B is its “greater length” and
“associated greater area of impact and [stream/river] crossings.”
Yet, while this alternative does have more waterway crossings,
the difference in wetland impacts (280 less acres of impacts for
the rejected alternative) dwarfs the difference in stream crossings
(13.2 more acres of impacts).  Tbl. 4.3.5-1. The added six miles of
length hardly makes this alternative impracticable. 4-19.  C.

The DEIS does not Adequately Address the Direct, Indirect and
Cumulative Impacts of the Keystone XL Pipeline 1.

The Keystone XL project will enable increased tar sands crude
extraction in Canada, contribute to perpetuation of use of oil and
inhibit development of alternative energy, and the EIS should consider
the impacts of tar sands vis a vis alternative energy sources.

The proposed Keystone XL project will enable further expansion of
tar sands development in the Western Canada Sedimentary Basin in the
province of Alberta. The existing crude oil pipeline export capacity
from Canada’s tar sands region is insufficient to accommodate
the forecasted crude oil supply growth. DEIS at 1-5. Limits on
infrastructure limit expansion of tar sands oil extraction, while
increased infrastructure for importing and refining tar sands oil,
increases the pressure for rapid development in the Canadian tar
sands. This expansion of tar sands development only exacerbates
the many existing environmental and social problems caused by tar
sands production in that region.88 The U.S. demand for tar sands and
infrastructure for transportation (including pipelines) have a close
causal relationship with tar sands extraction in Canada. The U.S. is
by far the biggest customer of Canadian tar sands. For example, the
2010 report of Corporate Ethics International et. al., “The Tar
Sands Invasion,” 89 states that 99% of exported Western Canadian
crude goes to the United States. According to the Keystone XL DEIS,
in 2008, Canada was the largest exporter of crude oil to the U.S.,
shipping approximately 1.7 million bpd (70 percent of total production)
from western Canada to the U.S. And CAPP (2009) predicted that demand
from Canadian refineries would increase by only about 0.076 million
bpd by 2015. Therefore, it is 88

See Andrew Nikiforuk, Canada’s Highway to Hell, ONEARTH (Fall 2007),
available at http://www.onearth.org/article/canadas-highway-to-hell
(last visited June 8, 2010), and attached as Exhibit 36; Dan
Woynillowicz, “Oil Sands Fever: The Environmental Implications
of Canada’s Oil Sands Rush,” (The Pembina Institute,
November, 2005), attached as Exhibit 37.  89 This full report is
incorporated herein. It is available at dirtyoilsands.org website:
http://dirtyoilsands.org/files/TarSandsInvasion-FINAL-low.pdf (last
visited June 8, 2010), and is attached as Exhibit 38.  40

expected that Canada will continue to export the bulk of its crude
oil production to the U.S.  market. DEIS at 1-5. Other customers,
Asia for example, are no current or viable substitute for this market
since there is insufficient infrastructure to transfer the Canadian
crude there and the Asian markets are not developed to receive it.90
What the DEIS overlooks is that U.S. oil consumption can be expected
to increase simply because adding million of barrels per day of new
supplies to the U.S. market will shift the long-term supply curve,
even if refineries are at capacity, since this additional source of
oil will perpetuate operation of the refineries and the use of oil in
the United States as opposed to developing alternative energy sources.
The DEIS also overlooks, and should be revised to analyze, the impact
of this supply of oil. Even if the supply brought in by the Keystone
XL project were not enough to effect price, this increased supply and
availability of oil will inhibit or replace development of alternative
technologies. In the transportation sector this includes for example
natural gas or hydrogen vehicles. In the power generation sector this
includes for example wind, solar, nuclear and natural gas. This was
explained in an analogous case, Mid-States Coalition for Progress v.
Surface Transportation Board, 345 F.3d 520, 549 (8th Cir. 2003),
where the court invalidated an FEIS for a rail line transporting
coal on the grounds that it failed to explore the indirect effects
of the project on the market for alternative sources of energy that
had lesser air quality impacts.  Although Mid-States involved a
coal train, the same principles apply here.  We also refer you to
and incorporate by reference: “How the Oil Sands Got to The Great
Lakes Basin: Pipelines, Refineries and Emissions to Air and Water,”
(University of Toronto 2008).91 The report discusses how “continued
reliance on oil might inhibit the development of alternative energy
sources such as wind or solar power.”92 Also, that report refers
to a 2008 report from the United States Conference of Mayors,
which discusses how “continued production and purchase of these
higher-carbon unconventional or synthetic fuels slows the United
States’ transition to clean, renewable energy sources.”93 Thus,
the importation of tar sands affects the energy market and inhibits
the development of alternative sources of energy. The perpetuation
of oil consumption that is caused or contributed to by tar sands
displaces development of alternative sources of energy. Thus the 90

See the August 5, 2009 letter of Dogwood Initiative
et. al. to the U.S. Dept. of State and authority
cited therein, attached as Exhibit 39.  91 Available at
http://www.powi.ca/pdfs/events/2008-10-08-how_the_oil_sands.pdf
(last visited June 8, 2010) and attached as Exhibit 40.
92 Based on the International Joint Commission, “Second
Summary of Critical Air Quality Issues in the Transboundary
Region Report from the International Air Quality Advisory Board
to the International Joint Commission, December 2007, p. 5,
available at http://www.ijc.org/php/publications/pdf/ID1620.pdf
(last visited June 8, 2010) and attached as Exhibit 41.
93 U.S. Conference of Mayors, 76th Annual Meeting, June 20-24,
2008 (Miami) 2008 Adopted resolution on high-carbon fuels
www.usmayors.org/resolutions/76th_conference/energy_05.asp (last
visited June 8, 2010) and attached as Exhibit 42.  41

relevant comparison of environmental impacts is not the combustion
of fuels derived from heavy synthetic crude compared to those derived
from conventional crude oil. Instead, the impacts of combustion and
use of heavy synthetic fuels should be compared to other reasonable
alternatives such increased use of alternative fuels and improving
energy efficiency and thus reducing the demand for oil.  2.

Impacts of Tar Sands Extraction and Production a.

Global warming pollution from tar sands oil production is higher even
than conventional oil production.

Canada’s tar sands are the single largest contributor to global
warming pollution emissions growth in Canada.94 Further, tar sands
oil production generates almost triple the global warming pollution
as conventional oil production because of the massive amounts of
energy needed to extract, upgrade, and refine the oil.95 Global
warming pollution emissions from tar sands production already
totaled 25 megatons in 2003 – more than the global warming
pollution emissions from all the cars in Maryland that year. 96
Tar sands-related global warming pollution is projected to more than
quadruple to between 108 and 126 megatons by 2015.97 As of early 2007,
oil companies and government were discussing possibilities for a
system for carbon capture and disposal in the tar sands region, but
without clear funding and timelines for the actual construction of
such a system. Tar sands development is also largely responsible for
the recent regional increase in air pollution from nitrogen oxides,
sulphur dioxide, volatile organic compounds, and particulate matter.
As discussed in greater detail below, the global warming impacts of
tar sands oil extraction are felt not only in Canada but also in the
United States, particularly in northern Alaska, where temperatures have
increased at almost twice the global average rate.98 These impacts are
the reasonably foreseeable effects of increasing tar sands production
and transport capacity and should be included in the analysis of the
environmental impacts of the proposed project.

Dan Woynillowicz, supra n. 88 at 19.  Id. p. 22. Information gathered
from Canadian Association of Petroleum Producers on conventional
oil and from the Pembina Institute for oil sands mining and in
situ drilling. Actual numbers are 28.6 conventional oil average GHG
intensity/barrel of oil as compared to 85.5 oil sands average GHG
intensity/barrel of oil.  96 Mattew Bramley, Derek Neabel, and Dan
Woynillowicz, “The Climate Implications of Canada’s Oil Sands
Development,” (The Pembina Institute, November 29, 2005), attached
as Exhibit 43. Maryland’s emissions from automobiles were 24 MT
CO2 based on gasoline consumption. US Dept of Transportation, Highway
Statistics 2003. CO2 was calculated as 20 lbs per gallon of gasoline
consumed.  97 Id. at 5.  98 IPCC, Climate Change 2007: The Physical
Science Basis; Summary for Policymakers, at 7 (May 2007). Available
at http://www.ipcc.ch/pdf/assessment-report/ar4/wg1/ar4-wg1-spm.pdf
(last visited June 8, 2010), attached as Exhibit 44.  95

b.

Open pit mines and intensive drilling are turning the boreal forest
into a wasteland.

The tar sands are a geologic formation that lie beneath approximately
149,000 square kilometers of Alberta’s northeastern boreal
forest. The Boreal is home to many species sensitive to industrial
development, such as caribou and lynx. Many of these species
migrate across the US/Canadian border. But open pit mining turns
this valuable ancient forest into a wasteland, destroying acres of
forest and polluting waters. Some 32 million acres of ecosystem are
being destroyed in Canada.99 Drilling in the tar sands requires such
a complex network of wells, roads, and pipes in areas where drilling
is taking place, that every part of the forest will be within a few
hundred yards of an industrial intrusion. Although the companies in
the tar sands assert that the land is reclaimed after mining, there
has not yet been any mine fully reclaimed.100 Forest, peatlands, and
wetlands ecosystems are highly complex, and it is unlikely they will
regenerate in areas filled with mine waste.101 Peat bogs are the single
best carbon sink of any habitat in terms of tons of carbon captured
and stored. Their destruction in this process adds to the negative
global warming impacts as stored greenhouse gases are released and
capture capacity is lost.102

c.

Toxic waste and large-scale water withdrawals threaten delicate
wetlands and river ecosystems.

Both mining and drilling operations in the tar sands have severe
impacts on water supply and quality in Alberta. To extract the tar
sands the soil is strip-mined and subjected to hightemperature steam
to separate the oil from the sand producing a heavy, dirty crude. If
the sands lie too deep beneath the surface for strip mining (generally
over 100 meters), in situ extraction is used by heating the tar sands
to the bitumen can flow to a well and be pumped to the surface.103
The tar sands region is rich in wetlands in the form of bogs, fens,
shallow ponds, shoreline marshes, and river delta systems, such as
the Peace-Athabasca Delta just downstream from the tar sands (to
the north). The Alberta Chamber of Resources has identified water
use as one of the top-four key challenges for mining operations.104
Mining operations require dredging wetlands and taking large amounts
of water from the rivers. The ecological integrity of any aquatic
ecosystems requires that adequate flows and seasonal variations
in flow be maintained.  Fish populations such as walleye, goldeye,
and long-nose sucker are vulnerable, particularly

For photos of this destruction and further description of extend
of damage in Canada see the Corporate Ethics Int’l report, infra
note 386.  100 Canadian Parks and Wilderness Society. “A Response
to the Mineable Oil Sands Strategy.” December 14, 2005, attached
as Exhibit 45.  101 Id.  102 For further discussion of the loss of
stored greenhouse gases and loss of carbon capture of the boreal
forest, see the Corporate Ethics Institute report, infra note 386.
103 Dan Woynillowicz, supra note 88, at 11.  104 Alberta Chamber
of Resources. “Oil Sands Technology Roadmap – Unlocking the
Potential,” p. 36 (2004), attached as Exhibit 46.  43

when water withdrawals reduce winter habitat in the Athabasca
River.105 But water allocations for existing, approved, and planned
tar sands mining operations are expected to quadruple over allocations
for existing projects in 2004.106 In-situ operations that take water
from underground aquifers can also harm the area’s water supply. The
hydrology in this region is a complex network of underground freshwater
and saline aquifers, ground waters, and wetlands. The links among
these systems are not yet fully understood, nor are the impacts of the
water withdrawals on surface land and waters.107 One specific concern
is that taking water out of underground aquifers could cause surface
water tables to sink – for example, causing a loss of wetlands.108
Tar sands mines also require extensive human-made wastewater reservoirs
or “tailings ponds” that pose another potential threat to wildlife
and water. Collectively, these pools of waste cover almost 20 square
miles, and are so vast that they can be seen from space.109 The
high concentrations of pollutants such as naphthenic acids in tar
sands tailings ponds are acutely toxic to aquatic life.110 To chase
off migratory birds, propane cannons go off at random intervals and
scarecrows stand guard on floating barrels. Many of the tailings ponds
are next to water bodies such as the Athabasca River, and there are
concerns about potential leakage from existing tailings ponds and
from future “remediated” or buried tailings. Alberta Environment
does not regulate naphthenic acids, and future management of these
pollutants is fraught with uncertainty.111 The deadly nature of these
tailings ponds was demonstrated in May 2008 when over 1,600 migrating
ducks died after landing in a tar sands tailings pond.112 3.

Impacts of refining heavy tar sands crude

The analysis set forth in the DEIS concerning cumulative impacts
associated with petroleum refining is insufficient in four major
respects. First, it impermissibly relies on the Clean Air Act
(“CAA”) and Clean Water Act (“CWA”) permitting process at
individual refineries to address environmental issues associated with
the processing of product delivered via 105

Mary Griffiths et al., “Troubled Waters, Troubling
Trends,” at 69 (The Pembina Institute, May 2006), available at
http://pubs.pembina.org/reports/TroubledW_Full.pdf (last visited June
8, 2010), and attached as Exhibit 47.  106 Dan Woynillowicz, supra
note 88, at 35.  107 Id. at 71.  108 Mary Griffiths, supra note 105.
109 Dan Woynillowicz, supra note 88, at 30.  110 Naturally occurring
naphthenic acids – a class of organic acids found within crude oils
and known to be toxic to a range of aquatic organisms – in rivers in
this region are generally below 1 mg/L, but those concentrations may be
as high as 110 mg/L in the tailings ponds. See Dan Woynillowicz, supra
note 88, at 31.  111 Id. at 32; Alberta Chamber of Resources. “Oil
Sands Technology Roadmap – Unlocking the Potential,” p. 36
(2004), attached as Exhibit 46.  112 Jeffery Jones, “Syncrude Duck
Deaths now Triple Initial Tally,” (March 31, 2009), available at
http://www.reuters.com/article/idUSTRE52U6Q920090331 (last visited
June 8, 2010), and attached as Exhibit 48.  44

the Project rather than presenting independent analysis, which is
both required by law and central to the purpose of NEPA environmental
review. As a result, it neglects to address a number of critical areas
of potential environmental impact associated with refineries. Second,
the DEIS fails to adequately analyze a variety of possible supply
and demand scenarios for clean energy and different grades of crude
oil. Instead of making an earnest effort to analyze what oil the
bitumen from the Keystone XL pipeline would be displacing, how much of
it would be additional, and what alternatives there are to the project,
the DEIS makes contradictory, unsupported assumptions in what appears
to be an attempt to further the project. Third, the analysis assumes
without basis a wide distribution of the product delivered by the
Project to refineries throughout PADD II and PADD III, and based on
this assumption declines to provide any analysis of region-specific
impacts on air quality. In fact, however, it is possible to predict
the destination of a substantial amount of the Keystone XL crude
with more specificity, based upon publicly available information
concerning market factors and physical constraints, such that air
quality impacts in these destination communities can and should be
assessed with specificity as well. Finally, the DEIS fails to comply
with the Department’s obligation to assess the impacts of the action
on minority and low-income communities, many of which are already
heavily impacted by high levels of pollution and will be harmed further
by the pollution likely to stem from refining the project crude.  a.

Impermissible reliance on permitting analysis

The DEIS refinery impacts analysis is grounded in assertions
that any air quality impacts associated with refining of product
delivered via the Project will be addressed in CAA permitting of the
refineries. Specifically, the DEIS states as follows: The existing
refineries processing heavy crude oil in PADD II and PADD III are
designed and permitted to refine heavy crude oil and the processing of
heavy crude oil transported via the proposed Project is not expected
to influence the exceedance of any permitted thresholds. EPA is the
federal agency with the authority to implement and enforce requirement
[sic] of the Clean Air Act. State agencies with approved State
Implementation Plans (SIPs), including Texas and Louisiana, have
been delegated authority by the EPA to administer an air quality
permitting program. The permitting process is designed to avoid
significant cumulative impacts to regional air quality associated
with emissions. DEIS at 3.14-33 *** It should be noted that federal
regulations require that refineries that undergo substantial
modification must integrate BACT into their design and methods
and emission offsets, which may increase, decrease, or have little
influence on baseline emission rates even though the volume of oil
increases. That is that expansions in the volume of oil that can be
refined may decrease overall emissions, which is especially true for
older refineries that use outdated emission controls. DEIS at 3.14-34

These statements contravene NEPA’s requirement that the EIS
evaluate the reasonably foreseeable cumulative impacts of the
Project. Cumulative impacts are “the impact[s] on the environment
which result[] from the incremental impact of the action when
added to other past, present, and reasonably foreseeable future
actions regardless of what agency (Federal or nonFederal) or person
undertakes such other actions.” 40 C.F.R. § 1508.7. Reliance
on EPA’s permitting processes as a substitute for independent
analysis of environmental impacts under NEPA is therefore entirely
inappropriate. It is settled law that NEPA requires a separate “hard
look” at a project’s cumulative impacts, and that assuming that
these cumulative impacts will not exist because such permitting
processes exist is no substitute for the appropriate analysis. See,
e.g., Wyo. Outdoor Council v. U.S. Army Corps of Eng'rs, 351 F.Supp.2d
1232, 1243 (D.Wyo.2005) (noting that “by their very nature”
cumulative impacts cannot be adequately assessed via such segmented
permitting processes and holding that reliance on such permitting is
unacceptable under NEPA). The purpose at the heart of NEPA – and
in particular its cumulative impact analysis requirements – is
to provide the type of comprehensive environmental analysis that
may otherwise be missed in piecemeal permit-by-permit analysis
of individual facilities, media, and construction activities.
Here, inappropriate reliance in the DEIS on CAA and CWA permitting
requirements for refineries results in significant deficiencies
in the analysis. Regarding the change in emissions of criteria
pollutants associated with proposed refinery expansions in Illinois,
Indiana, and Michigan, the DEIS states: As a result of improvements in
control technologies and the use of offsets, these refinery upgrades
and expansions generally resulted in an overall increase in carbon
monoxide, and a decrease in emissions of particulate matter, sulfur
dioxide, and nitrogen dioxides. DEIS at 3.14-34.  The assumption in
the DEIS is that “any refinery expansions or upgrades at refineries
that would receive crude oil from the Project would likely be required
to adhere to the same or comparable regulatory standards.” DEIS
at 3.14-34. However, the emissions decreases that the DEIS claims
have occurred, and tend to occur, during the permitting process for
refineries increasing their capacity of heavy crude oil processing
are often from unrelated improvements, and do not imply that the
actual emissions impacts of the project will be low. The emissions
estimates produced in netting analysis pursuant to CAA prevention
of significant deterioration (“PSD”) and nonattainment new
source review (“NNSR”) requirements are not simple estimates of
increases associated with a particular permitted activity. Rather,
they are the sum of raw emissions increase estimates – which are
often very significant for expansions to allow processing of tar sands
crude – and any other legally creditable emissions increases and
decreases at the facility within a multi-year “contemporaneous”
time frame. See 40 C.F.R. 52.21; 40 C.F.R. 51.166(b).  Thus, in many
cases, the actual emissions increase associated with processing crude
delivered via the Project will be entirely offset in the permitting
process by past unassociated emissions decreases. In such case, the net
emissions derived from the permitting process will not reflect the full
projected actual increase associated with an expansion project. Indeed,
in one major recent expansion project, at BP’s Whiting refinery in
northwest Indiana, hundreds of tons of increases in sulfur dioxide
(SO2) were offset by emissions reductions taken many years ago at
the facility, such that they were not reflected in the final netting
numbers used to determine the 46

need for more stringent emission controls. It is the purpose of
NEPA analysis to see past such limitations of permitting analysis
and to look more comprehensively at the real impacts of a project.
With respect to water emissions, the DEIS analysis is extraordinarily
thin, and falls far short of what is required and appropriate under
NEPA. The DEIS does no more than recite, in cursory fashion, a few
of the technical upgrades that have sometimes been associated with
refinery expansion projects to reduce associated wastewater and
stormwater emissions. This “analysis” fails to acknowledge or
address the fact that, in several instances (e.g., the BP Whiting
refinery expansion and the ConocoPhillips Wood River refinery
expansion), significant increases in discharges to clean water bodies
as a result of tar sands refinery expansions have been allowed under
CWA antidegradation regulations based upon a purported showing that
the increase is “necessary to accommodate important economic or
social development.”113 In BP’s water permit, for example, the
company attributes increases in ammonia discharges directly to the
equality of the Canadian crude, saying that bitumen has 4.5 times the
nitrogen of conventional crude. Because of this, they say, they will
have an increase of more than 2,000 lbs of ammoniaN in their process
wastewater.114 In this case, the permit would have allowed the facility
to emit a higher level of pollution. The DEIS should not assume that
permits will not allow facilities to emit additional pollution and
must do the analysis for such a situation. In any event, for purposes
of NEPA review, any increased discharge to water must be considered
as part of cumulative impacts analysis regardless of whether state
regulators have determined in the permitting context that the increase
is “necessary.” Moreover, the DEIS merely recites possible ranges
of pollutants, without examining the possible environmental effects of
these pollutants. The DEIS reiterates the conclusory assertion that
“required air permitting . . . would avoid significant cumulative
impacts to air quality,” and uses this as justification to completely
neglect to quantify the possible impacts that increased 113

See 40 C.F.R § 131.12. The quoted standard is required of any
state which operates its own permitting system in accordance
with 40 C.F.R. § 131.12. The Wood River expansion, in Roxana,
Illinois, was determined to have satisfied this standard by
the Illinois EPA in its draft permit. See Draft Modified NPDES
Permit to Discharge into Waters of the State Public Notice/Fact
Sheet, Illinois EPA, Bureau of Water, at 16, available at
http://www.epa.state.il.us/public-notices/2006/conoco-wood-river/index.pdf
(last visited June 29, 2010) (citing 35 Ill. Adm. Code 302.105, which
incorporates the quoted standard into Illinois law), and attached
as Exhibit 49. See also “House Scolds Indiana for Hike in Lake
Pollution,” Fort Wayne Journal Gazette (July 25, 2007) available at
http://www.journalgazette.net/apps/pbcs.dll/article?AID=/20070725/NEWS03/707250310/1002/
LOCAL (last visited June 29, 2010) (noting that as the Indiana
Department of Environmental Management issued a new permit to the BP
Whiting Refinery it acknowledged that it “kn[ew] that the increase
in the effluent limits for ammonia and TSS (total suspended solids)
will result in some degradation of [] water quality”), and attached
as Exhibit 50.  114 Advent-Environ, Addendum to “Case-by-Case
Antidegradation Analysis” Prepared for BP Whiting, Indiana,
submitted to IDEM November 30, 2006. Evaluation of Ammonia-N Mass
Discharge After Refinery Reconfiguration and Use of CXHO. Available
at http://www.in.gov/idem/clarification_3.pdf (last visited June 29,
2010), and attached as Exhibit 51.  47

pollution would have upon the environment and human health. DEIS
at 3.14-36. Such a cursory treatment of pollution increases from the
refining of heavy crude oil does not satisfy the agency’s obligations
under NEPA to take a “hard look” at the cumulative effects of
the Project. Kleppe v.  Sierra Club, 427 U.S. 390, 410 n.21 (1976).  b.

Lack of analysis of different clean energy and oil supply and demand
scenarios

In several places, the DEIS asserts that the crude supplied by the
Project will not likely increase overall refining of heavy crude,
because the Project crude will simply be replacing existing heavy
crude supplies. Specifically, it states: Since light crude supplies
are decreasing, refinery upgrades and expansions that allow for the
refining of heavy crude oil, especially along the Gulf Coast, are
occurring and would continue to occur whether or not the Project
is constructed. DEIS at 3.14-35.  This statement makes multiple
unsupported assumptions. First, it assumes that the increased supply
of heavy crude caused by the project will have no effect on refinery
behavior. This assumption is entirely unrealistic and such assumptions
have been held to be unacceptable by courts. In Mid-States Coalition
for Progress v. Surface Transportation Board, 345 F.3d 520, 549 (8th
Cir. 2003), for example, the court rejected an agency’s contention
that it need not examine how a rail line which would increase the
availability of coal would affect the long-term demand for coal by
utility companies versus other cleaner fuel sources. The situation here
is closely analogous. The Department must seriously examine the extent
to which the increased availability of bitumen will lead, over time,
to an increased demand for bitumen vis-à-vis cleaner crude sources
and alternative energy.  The claim that the project will not affect
refineries’ decisions to process heavy crude is also in tension
with the justifications for the Project set forth in the DEIS which
state that the project is needed because of “declining or uncertain
production” from other major producers of heavy crude. DEIS at
1-6. It is disingenuous for the DEIS to simultaneously assume that
(1) heavy crude will be scarce in order to justify the need for the
pipeline, and (2) there will be such an ample supply of heavy crude
that the additional pipeline capacity will not affect refineries’
choices of whether or when to invest large sums of money to upgrade
or expand heavy crude refining capacity.  Instead of making these
unsupported, contradictory assumptions as it does in the DEIS,
the State Department should conduct and present the results of
a study about what types of oil the bitumen from the Keystone XL
pipeline would be displacing, how much of it would be additional,
(i.e. additional supply leading to increased refining, which would not
occur in the absence of the project) and what alternatives there are
to the project. The study should then look to the additional pollution
that will be caused by displacement of alternative energy and cleaner
crudes and by additional bitumen refining.115 This assessment should
be conducted refinery by 115

As the DEIS analysis properly recognizes, increased bitumen refining
will lead to increased pollution. DEIS at 3.14-29 to 35. Bitumen
contains significantly more impurities than other 48

refinery. As discussed below, it is possible to narrow down the
refineries that may receive Keystone XL blended bitumen significantly
more than the DEIS does.  It is possible that that this analysis will
yield accurate and definitive numbers concerning the destination of
the Project crude and the anticipated additional processing of bitumen
(as opposed to replacement of current processing) that will occur as a
result. To the extent that it is possible to make that determination,
then it is essential that DOS do so, rather than relying on cursorily
stated and entirely unsupported assumptions regarding this highly
technical and complex matter.  We also recognize the possibility that,
given the highly complex and difficult nature of such an estimate
(which may depend upon knowledge of specific equipment at each
affected refinery116), it will not be possible for DOS to make a
precise refinery-by-refinery estimate. In such a case, however, DOS
must fulfill its duty to provide the information that is available and
to make a credible estimate based on generally accepted methods.117
It is appropriate that, to the extent a more complete analysis
cannot be done, DOS has attempted to craft an analysis which would
provide some information to the public by estimating an upper bound
on additional air pollution that might be created by refining of
the project crude. However, due to the flawed netting analysis and
the lack of any analysis concerning increases in water pollutants,
the analysis has failed in its task. Further, the analysis makes no
attempt to narrow down the location or the actual impacts of these
emissions on public health or the environment.  The DEIS disregards
the very real possibility that, in the absence of the Project, cleaner
energy sources might replace the dirty crude being refined by many
of the refineries in question.  Instead, it proceeds on the premise
that oil demand will be high and completely unaffected by oil supply
or the availability of alternative energy sources. This possibility
that, in the absence of the project, cleaner energy sources may be
utilized more fully is also supported by multiple statements, policies,
and analyses by the Obama administration. For example, a recent EPA
analysis indicates that technologically feasible oil-saving policies
in the transportation sector alone could save as much as 6.7 million
barrels per day by 2030.118 Given the very real possibility of a
transition to a clean energy economy, instead of continuing reliance
on oil, the Project must be treated for purposes of cumulative impacts
analysis as a cause of both continued processing of crude at current
levels, and of refinery expansions that might not otherwise occur.
Thus, the likelihood of the “worst case scenario” upper-bound air
emissions analysis presented in the DEIS analysis should be thoroughly
analyzed, which is not done in the DEIS. DEIS at 3.14crude oils,
even other heavy crudes, including additional nitrogen, sulfur, lead
and other metals.  See US Geological Survey, Heavy Oil and Natural
Bitumen Resources in Geological Basins of the World, 14 tbl.1 (2007)
attached as exhibit 52.  116 Accufacts, Inc., PADD III & PADD II
Refinery Options for Canadian Bitumen Oil and the Keystone XL Pipeline,
7-8 (2010) [hereinafter Accufacts Report] attached as exhibit 53.
117 40 C.F.R. § 1502.22. For a more complete discussion of the State
Department’s duties where information is unavailable or incomplete,
see subsection C of this section.  118 EPA, “EPA Analysis of the
Transportation Sector: Greenhouse Gas and Oil Reduction Scenarios,”
March 18, 2010, available at www.epa.gov/otaq/climate/publications.htm
(last visited June 29, 2010), and attached as Exhibit 54.  49

35 to 36. As discussed above, the upper-bound emissions analysis is
inadequate in that the only data provided are total pollution ranges
calculated via a flawed “netting” methodology.  Additionally,
the DEIS fails to consider the location-specific effects of these
increases on the human environment.  c.

Failure to provide location-specific impacts analysis

The DEIS declines to provide any analysis of refinery impacts in
specific regions and locations, asserting flatly that such analysis is
not possible given the wide geographic array of possible destinations
for the Project crude. The DEIS sets forth only an overall estimate
of potential emission increases based on extrapolation from PSD/NNSR
netting totals in the Motiva and Hyperion refinery permits.  As
discussed above, this estimate is based on the faulty assumption that
net emissions estimates generated in connection with NSR permitting
reflect actual project-related emissions increases. DEIS at 3.14-34
to 36. That problem notwithstanding, the emissions numbers presented
in the DEIS are quite high. The DEIS concludes that the project could
result in the release of an additional: 1,736 tons of nitrogen oxides,
4,500 tons of carbon monoxide, 4,654 tons of sulfur dioxide, 2,353 tons
of particulate matter and 1,061 tons of volatile organic compounds
per year. DEIS at 3.14-36. The particulate matter estimate is almost
29 times the amount released by a medium-sized refinery, the Valero
Houston facility. 119 (See Table 1.)  The sulfur dioxide estimate is
more than 100 times the total sulfur dioxide emitted at that facility.
Even for those pollutants for which the DEIS produces relatively low
estimates, Table 1 still indicates that the project will produce the
equivalent of 5.8 times as much volatile organic compounds, 6.3 times
as much nitrogen oxides, and 14.7 times as much carbon monoxide as a
medium-sized US refinery. Even compared to the largest refinery in the
country, the ExxonMobil Baytown facility,120 the project would still
produce almost three times the sulfur dioxide and about one and a half
times the particulate matter of such a facility. When combined with
the high probability that the vast majority of project crude will be
refined in a very small number of communities, as discussed later in
this subsection, the additional pollutant loads on these communities
are equivalent to building a number of new medium-sized refineries
in these areas.

The Valero Houston refinery is the 73rd largest refinery
in the United States out of a total of 143, making its size
representative of the median U.S. refinery. See Ranking of US
Refineries, US Energy Information Administration (EIA), available at
http://www.eia.doe.gov/neic/rankings/refineries.htm (last visited June
29, 2010), and attached as Exhibit 55.  120 Ranking of US Refineries,
EIA, available at http://www.eia.doe.gov/neic/rankings/refineries.htm
(last visited June 29, 2010), and attached as Exhibit 55.  50

Table 1 - DEIS Projected Pollutants Compared to 2008 Emissions of
Selected Refineries DEIS Projected Tons of Pollutants

Tons of Emissions; Valero Houston Refinery 2008121

DEIS Projected Emissions as % of Valero 2008 Emissions

Projected DEIS Emissions as % of Baytown Refinery 2008 Emissions

1,471%

Tons of Emissions; ExxonMobil Baytown Refinery 2008122 2,015

CO

4,500

NOx

1,736

634%

1,938

90%

SO2

4,654

10,117%

1,594

292%

Particulate Matter VOCs

2,353

2,870%

271%

1,061

582%

1,781

60%

223%

In the face of the magnitude of these emissions estimates, it is
inappropriate and unacceptable that the DEIS makes no effort whatsoever
to specify where these fairly massive potential emission increases
would take place. Specifically, the DEIS justifies its failure to
provide location-specific analysis as follows: It is not possible to
predict with certainty how refining the heavy crude oil transported
via the proposed Project would impact air quality, or even where
those impacts would occur.  The potential refinery expansions are
in various stages of planning and implementation, and each refinery
is unique in regard to the size and type of expansion or upgrade,
the type of best available control technology (BACT) that has been or
would be implemented, the status of the expansions, the availability
of air emissions modeling, and the resulting impact of associated
emissions relative to existing conditions. DEIS at 3.1433 to 34.  ***
Commercial, economic, and political forces would largely determine
the quantity, type, and processing destination of the oil transported
via the Project. These forces are likely to

Texas Commission on Environmental Quality Air
Emissions Inventory, Valero Houston Refinery, available at
http://www12.tceq.state.tx.us/crpub/index.cfm?fuseaction=iwr.pgmdetail&addn_id=3646005520
09251&disp_aei=Y (last visited June 29, 2010), and attached as
Exhibit 56. Totals for each pollutant are obtained by adding the
2008 annual tons per year (“Annual TPY”) with the emission
events and scheduled maintenance startup and shutdown total (EESMSS)
rows for each pollutant category. PM10 refers to particulate matter
smaller than 10 micrometers in diameter, and is therefore inclusive
of PM2.5, which includes only that matter with diameters less than
2.5 micrometers.  122 Texas Commission on Environmental Quality
Air Emissions Inventory, Exxon Mobil Baytown Facility, available at
http://www12.tceq.state.tx.us/crpub/index.cfm?fuseaction=iwr.pgmdetail&addn_id=6286037420
09251&disp_aei=Y (last visited June 29, 2010), and attached as
Exhibit 57.  51

evolve on a day-to-day basis and from year-to-year for the life of
the Project. DEIS at 3.14-35.  In tandem with these assertions, the
DEIS states that the Project crude could potentially be delivered
by virtually any refinery within PADD II or PADD III that has the
capability (or will be upgraded) to process heavy crude. See DEIS
at 3.14-30 (“Deliveries at the Cushing terminal in Oklahoma would
generally serve refineries in PADD II, which includes 15 states in
the Midwest from North Dakota to Oklahoma and east to Ohio”); DEIS
at 3.14-33 (“a total of 15 refineries in PADD III would be connected
directly to the Project,” but “[o]il transported via the proposed
Project could be delivered to other refineries in PADD III” using
a secondary mode of transportation”).  In the first instance, these
broad assumptions regarding the destination of Project crude reflect
a dereliction of DOS’s duty to seek out specific information
concerning adverse impacts.  Where an evaluation of reasonably
foreseeable significant adverse impacts requires information which is
unavailable or incomplete, CEQ guidelines require that DOS obtain that
information where the “overall costs of obtaining [the information]
are not exorbitant.”123 If DOS cannot obtain the information, it
is required to include a summary of “existing credible scientific
evidence” relevant to those impacts and to evaluate those impacts
based on “theoretical approaches or research methods generally
accepted in the scientific community.”124 DOS could likely obtain
much of the information needed to predict where the project crude will
be refined.  For instance, TransCanada could provide DOS with details
of the shipping commitments the company has already signed, which total
380Mb/d (more than half of the initial 700Mb/d Keystone XL pipeline
capacity) in order to determine where the crude will be refined.125
However, even if the department cannot obtain such information, it
can certainly summarize credible evidence concerning where the crude
is likely to end up.  As a factual matter, DOS’s unsupported claims
that the project crude could end up at any refinery in PADD II or PADD
III are simply inconsistent with market realities. In view of capacity
and cost constraints, it is clear that the overwhelming majority of
the crude delivered via the Project would go to a limited number of
refineries clustered in two specific areas. Analysis by the Canadian
National Energy Board (NEB) found the market for the project crude to
be limited to only fifteen refineries. (See Table 2.) An independent
analysis by Accufacts attached to these comments (the “Accufacts
Report”) notes that “PADD II refineries are unlikely to refine
more than a small fraction of the bitumen transported via the Keystone
XL pipeline” because the area is “short on [bitumen] refining and
long on pipeline capacity” that can bring bitumen to the area.126 The
Accufacts Report therefore concludes that the vast majority of project
crude will go to PADD III and identifies 22 refineries in the area that
have the necessary “process building blocks” to be able to accept
bitumen. Accufacts Report at 1, 7. (See Table 2.) The DEIS itself 123

40 C.F.R. § 1502.22.  40 C.F.R. § 1502.22.  125 See National
Energy Board Reasons for Decision at p. 14 (Mar. 2010) [hereinafter
NEB Analysis] attached to this comment as exhibit 58 (noting that
TransCanada has secured commitments from shippers totaling 380,000
barrels per day for an average term of 17 years).  126 Accufacts
Report, supra note 116 and attached as exhibit 53, at 10.  124

acknowledges that “there are some refineries . . . that would be
more likely to receive the oil.” DEIS at 3.14-32 to 33. Yet despite
that acknowledgement, and despite the publicly-availably contrary
information set forth in the NEB analysis and the Accufacts Report,
the DEIS simply recites that there are a total of 85 refineries in
PADDs II and III (27 in PADD II and 58 in PADD III) and neglects to
engage in any analysis about which of these refineries are likely
to process significant amounts of the Keystone XL bitumen (or are
even capable of doing so). DEIS at 3.14-33.  Table 2 - Refineries
Identified as Likely Market for Keystone XL Bitumen by Other Analyses

Port Arthur Area Refineries

Accufacts Report127

NEB Analysis128

Motiva Enterprises; Port Arthur, TX Valero Energy, Port Arthur,
TX Exxon Mobil, Beaumont, TX

Motiva Enterprises, Port Arthur, TX Valero Energy, Port Arthur,
TX Exxon Mobil, Beaumont, TX Total Petrochemicals, Port Arthur, TX

Houston / Texas City Area Refineries

Houston (Lyondell), Houston, TX Deer Park Refining (Shell) Deer Park,
TX129 Exxon Mobil, Baytown, TX BP, Texas City, TX Valero Energy,
Texas City, TX

Houston (Lyondell), Houston, TX Deer Park Refining, (Shell) Deer Park,
TX Exxon Mobil, Baytown, TX BP, Texas City, TX Valero Energy, Texas
City, TX Valero Energy, Houston Marathon Oil, Texas City, TX Pasadena
Refining, Pasadena, TX

Other Refineries

CITGO, Lake Charles, LA ConocoPhillips, Lake Charles, LA
ConocoPhillips, Belle Chasse, LA Exxon Mobil, Baton Rouge, LA Valero
Energy, St. Charles, LA Marathon Oil, Garyville, LA Chalmette Refining,
Chalmette, LA Motiva Enterprises, Norco, LA ChevronTexaco, Pascagoula,
MS ConocoPhillips; Sweeny, TX CITGO, Corpus Christi, TX Flint Hills
Resources, Corpus Christi, TX Valero Energy, Corpus Christi, TX WRB
Refining, Borger, TX

CITGO, Lake Charles, LA ConocoPhillips, Lake Charles, LA

Calcasieu Refining, Lake Charles, LA

Accufacts Report, supra note 116, at 7, tbl.5.  NEB Analysis at 13.
129 While the Accufacts report and the NEB refer alternately
to “Deer Park Refining” and “Shell Deer Park,” they
refer to the same facility operated by Deer Park Refining
Co., a Shell Oil subsidiary. See Shell Oil Co., About Deer Park, at
http://www.shell.us/home/content/usa/aboutshell/projects_locations/deerpark/about_deer_park/
(last visited June 29, 2010), and attached as Exhibit 59.  128

Indeed, it is clear from the Accufacts Report and the NEB Analysis
that the vast majority of the project crude is likely to go to
refineries in two areas, all of which are in the same fortyfive mile
radius on the Texas Gulf Coast. (See Table 3.) Of the total refining
capacity identified in the NEB Analysis, 83% is located in either
the greater Houston (including Texas City) or Port Arthur areas. The
Accufacts Report, in turn, estimates that of the crude which is
refined in PADD III, 90% will be refined in these same two localities.
Table 3 - Percentage of Keystone XL Crude Market by Area Accufacts
Report130 50% Houston / Texas City Areas Port Arthur Area Other Areas

40% 10%

NEB Analysis131 Houston Subtotal: 31% Texas City Subtotal: 18% Total:
49% 34% 17%

DEIS No Analysis

No Analysis No Analysis

The Accufacts Report found that an estimated 50% of the total project
crude would be refined in the Houston/Texas City area. Notably,
the NEB’s analysis indicates that the Houston and Texas City areas
comprise 49% of the refining market open to Keystone XL. The Accufacts
report also estimated that 40% of the project crude would be refined in
the Nederland area (including refineries in Beaumont and Port Arthur,
Texas). The NEB analysis indicates that 34% of the refining market
open to the pipeline is in this area. Both reports provide evidence
that over 80% of the crude delivered by the project will be refined
at a small handful of refineries in two clusters on the gulf coast
of Texas.  The NEB Analysis and Accufacts Report are consistent in
finding that the vast majority of project crude is likely to go to
two localities within a small geographical area. The analyses are
also wholly incompatible with the Department’s contention that it
is impossible make any predictions concerning where the crude will end
up. Together, they provide a strong indication that the Department has
not complied with its duty to provide the relevant evidence that can
be obtained and to make use of theoretical approaches or generally
accepted methods to evaluate impacts where full information is not
available.132 As discussed above, even the DEIS’s flawed estimate
of the additional pollution generated by the project indicates that
permitting the project would be equivalent to siting a large 130

Accufacts Report, supra note 116, at 2 tbl.ES. It is important to note
that Table ES estimates the percentage of project crude refined in
PADD III likely to go to specific areas, however given the Report’s
conclusion that “PADD II refineries are unlikely to refine more
than a small fraction of the bitumen transported via the Keystone XL
pipeline” these estimates are likely to approximate the overall
distribution of project crude. Accufacts Report, supra note 116,
at 10, attached as Exhibit 53.  131 NEB Analysis at 13 tbl. 3-3. The
percentages are calculated by dividing the subtotal crude refining
capacity for each region by the total market crude refining capacity,
attached as Exhibit 58.  132 40 C.F.R. § 1502.22.  54

number of new medium-sized refineries in these areas. Given that there
is very little actual ambiguity regarding the refining destination
of the crude delivered via the Project, it is imperative that the
DEIS provide careful analysis of the impact of increased refining
emissions on the affected region. The Houston/Texas City and Port
Arthur areas are already burdened with a heavy pollutant load, in
particular from refinery emissions. It is essential to understand
from the DEIS analysis what additional burden would result to the
environment and public health from the increased supply of dirty, heavy
crude delivered via the pipeline to refineries in these areas.  d.

Lack of environmental justice analysis

In addition to the Department’s responsibility to analyze the
specific local effects of air and water pollution caused by refining
tar sands heavy crude, the department is also required, under Executive
Order 12898, to address and attempt to minimize disproportionate
impacts on minority and low-income populations.133 However, the DEIS
makes no effort to assess the environmental justice implications of
the substantial increases in pollution likely to occur in communities
around refineries.  i.

Failure to assess impacts on affected populations

Using CEQ guidelines,134 the DEIS identifies counties along the project
corridor in which significant low–income or minority populations
exist. DEIS at 3.10-29 to 36. While all of the effects of the project
on the identified counties should be analyzed, the low-income and
minority communities in these counties are likely to be especially
impacted by additional air and water pollution. This is particularly
the case in light of the evidence presented in Subsection C that
the refinery-related impacts are likely to be concentrated in a few
specific localities, in which such communities can be identified.
The DEIS wholly fails to undertake this required analysis. In fact,
two of the counties identified by the DEIS as containing minority
and low-income populations (Harris County, TX and Jefferson County,
TX) are home to all of the refineries estimated to take crude in the
Houston and Port Arthur areas. (The Texas City refineries are in
Galveston County, which is not analyzed in the DEIS, as discussed
below.) These two communities are already heavily impacted by air
and water pollution.  Port Arthur, located in Jefferson County,
Texas, was chosen by the EPA in November of last year as one of ten
communities across the country in which the Agency is beginning a
pilot program on environmental justice in order to address pronounced
“environmental and human

Exec. Order No. 12,898 as amended, Federal Actions to
Address Environmental Justice in Minority Populations and
Low-Income Populations, (Feb. 11, 1994).  134 Environmental
Justice: Guidance Under the National Environmental Policy
Act, Council on Environmental Quality (1997) available at
http://ceq.hss.doe.gov/nepa/regs/ej/justice.pdf (last visited June 29,
2010), and attached as Exhibit 60.  55

health challenges.”135 Moreover, Jefferson County is designated
as being in nonattainment with National Ambient Air Quality Standards
(NAAQS).136 The Houston metropolitan area, located in Harris County,
Texas, was ranked the seventh worst in the country in ozone pollution
and sixteenth worst in year-round particle pollution by the American
Lung Association this year.137 A 2006 study which investigated the
toxicity of four hazardous air pollutants in Houston showed that
concentrations for three of the pollutants posed significant risks
of cancer.138 The study noted that the EPA has set a benchmark of
reducing the additional risk of cancer from any pollutant below
one excess death per million people.139 However, the study found
that “large portions of the city” have pollutant concentrations
“posing a risk higher than one excess cancer death in every 100,000
people,” a risk ten times higher than the benchmark.140 The study
also concluded that “concentrations of 1,3-butadiene and diesel
[particulate matter] approach a level indicating risk greater than
one excess cancer death per 10,000 people,” one hundred times the
acceptable risk set by the EPA benchmark.141 Moreover, the study
noted that because these risks are calculated for each pollutant
individually, “the cumulative risks from several pollutants present
simultaneously are even greater.”142 Harris County, Texas is also
designated as being an NAAQS nonattainment area.143 ii.  Failure to
identify other minority and low-income populations affected by Keystone
XL and to assess environmental justice impacts on these populations.
The absence of analysis in the DEIS on increased local air and water
pollution from refineries also results in a failure to even assess the
possible environmental impacts on minority and low-income populations
that are outside the project corridor, but likely to be affected by
Keystone XL. For instance, according to the NEB and Accufacts studies
discussed in subsection C above there is likely to be significant
refining of project crude in Galveston County, where the 135

Environmental Showcase Communities,
Environmental Protection Agency, available at
http://www.epa.gov/compliance/environmentaljustice/grants/ej-showcase.html
(last visited June 29, 2010), and attached as Exhibit 61; see
also Press Release, EPA Announces Environmental Justice Showcase
Communities (Nov. 17, 2009), attached as Exhibit 62.  136 US EPA
Green Book, http://www.epa.gov/oaqps001/greenbk/mapnpoll.html (last
visited June 29, 2010), and attached as Exhibit 63.  137 Amer. Lung
Association, 2010 State of the Air Report at 12-13, available at
http://www.stateoftheair.org/2010/assets/SOTA2010.pdf, and attached
as Exhibit 64.  138 Andrea Clements, et al, The Control of Air
Toxics: Toxicology Motivation and Houston Implications (2006). The
Executive Summary is attached as exhibit 65. The full report is
attached as exhibit 66. The study investigated toxicity from Benzene,
1,3-Butadiene, Diesel Particulate Matter and Formaldehyde.  139 The
Control of Air Toxics: Toxicology Motivation and Houston Implications,
Executive Summary at 4.  140 Id.  141 Id.  142 Id.  143 US EPA Green
Book, supra note 137..  56

Texas City refineries are located. In addition, the studies identify a
discrete number of other refineries located elsewhere which may refine
project crude. (See Table 4.) The DEIS should determine whether these
counties contain significant low-income or minority populations under
the CEQ guidelines and then go on to assess the possible impacts
on these communities that might stem from additional refining of
heavy crude.

Table 4- Counties/Parishes not Analyzed for Environmental Justice
Impacts but Containing a Refinery Identified as Likely to Accept
Project Crude County/Parish Calcasieu (LA)

Refineries in County CITGO, Lake Charles; ConocoPhillips, Lake
Charles; Calcasieu Refining, Lake Charles Exxon Mobil, Baton Rouge
ConocoPhillips, Belle Chasse Chalmette Refining, Chalmette Valero
Energy, St. Charles; Motiva Enterprises, Norco Marathon Oil, Garyville
ChevronTexaco, Pascagoula ConocoPhillips, Sweeny BP, Texas City;
Valero Energy, Texas City; Marathon Oil, Texas City WRB Refining,
Borger CITGO, Corpus Christi; Flint Hills Resources, Corpus Christi;
Valero Energy, Corpus Christi

East Baton Rouge (LA) Plaquemines (LA) St. Bernard (LA) St Charles
(LA) St. John the Baptist (LA) Jackson (MS) Brazoria (TX) Galveston
(TX) Hutchinson (TX) Nueces (TX)

The DEIS currently provides an under-inclusive list of counties
with low-income and minority populations. It makes no effort to
determine what effects the project will actually have on these
communities or to document the existing problems in these areas
that might be exacerbated by the project. The DEIS must do more if
the Department is to take seriously its responsibility to “make
achieving environmental justice part of its mission by identifying and
addressing . . . disproportionately high and adverse human health or
environmental effects of its .  . . activities on minority . . . and
low-income populations.”144 4.

The DEIS does not adequately address the climate change impacts a.

Anthropogenic emission of greenhouse gases is causing global warming.

According to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, a
group of over 2000 of the world’s preeminent climate scientists,
climate change is a fact. The IPCC concludes that “warming of the
climate system is unequivocal, as is now evident from observations of
increases in global average air and ocean temperatures, widespread
melting of snow and ice and rising global average sea level.”145
Most of the observed increase in global average temperatures since
the mid-20th century is “very likely due to the observed increase
in anthropogenic greenhouse

Exec. Order No. 12,898 as amended, Federal Actions to Address
Environmental Justice in Minority Populations and Low-Income
Populations, (Feb. 11, 1994).  145 IPCC, Climate Change 2007:Synthesis
Report (Nov. 2007) at 30, attached as Exhibit 67.  57

gas concentrations.”146 According to the IPCC’s assessment of
the latest scientific literature, evidence from all continents and
most oceans shows that many natural systems are being affected by
regional climate changes, particularly temperature increases.147 In
the United States, warming in western mountains is projected to cause
decreased snowpack, more winter flooding and reduced summer flows,
exacerbating competition for overallocated water resources.148 Rising
temperatures will impact vegetation and animal species and could
in the long term reduce agricultural yields.149 More frequent and
more powerful hurricanes are expected which, combined with rising
sea levels, will damage coastal areas.150 Because climate change is
more pronounced in the Arctic, Alaska is particularly at risk due to
melting permafrost, coastal erosion, decreased levels of sea ice and
related impacts on icedependent species.151 One of the key mitigation
strategies that the IPCC identifies for reducing the rate and impacts
of global warming is changing the sources on which we rely for energy
from oil, coal and other fossil fuels to renewable low-carbon sources
including wind, solar and geothermal energy.152 b.

Greenhouse gas emissions associated with extraction and refining of
tar sands oil

As described above, extraction and refining of tar sands oil is
extremely energy and greenhouse gas intensive. A life-cycle analysis
of the GHG emission of tar sands oil shows significantly increased
carbon dioxide emissions over conventional oil.153 A report by the
Polaris Institute states that production of tar sands oil currently
releases about three times more greenhouse gas emissions than pumping
conventional oil, producing about 85.5 kg of carbon dioxide per barrel
of tar sands oil.154 The increase comes primarily from the fuel needed
for the extraction of the tar sands (in most cases significant amounts
of natural gas) and in the fugitive 146

Id. at 39. The authors of the IPCC reports use standardized
terminology to describe their probabilistic assessments as
follows: virtually certain – greater than 99% probability of
occurrence; very likely – 90 to 99% probability; likely – 66
to 90% probability; about likely as not – 33 to 66% probability;
unlikely – 10 to 33% probability; very unlikely – 1 to 10%
probability; exceptionally unlikely – less than 1% probability. See
id. at 27.  147 Id. at 31.  148 Id. at 52.  149 Id.  150 Id.  151 Id.
152 Id. at 60.  153 See Simon Mui and Roland Hwang, “White Paper:
Life Cycle analysis of Greenhouse Gas Emissions from Tar Sands,”
(NRDC, Nov. 2008), attached as Exhibit 68; Declaration of Greg
Karras, attached as Exhibit 69.  154 Polaris Institute, “A Dirty
Little Secret: Canada’s Global Warming Engine,” available at
http://www.tarsandswatch.org/files/adirtylittlesecret.pdf (last
visited June 8, 2010), and attached as Exhibit 70.  58

emissions from the overall process. The exploitation of this resource
is resulting in Canada’s violation of its Kyoto Protocol obligations
and driving the outsourcing the refining part of the equation to
the US, which is not a signatory party to the Kyoto treaty. Id.
While exploitation of the tar sands will generate up to one-third more
greenhouse gas pollution than conventional oil, the mining of the tar
sands compounds the global warming effect because it destroys hundreds,
potentially thousands, of square miles of some of the best natural
carbon sequestration on the planet. The tar sands are located in the
boreal regions of northern Alberta, an area covered with forest and
peatbogs. Removal of the trees and stripping away the bog removes the
ecosystem’s ability to store that carbon, but also ends up releasing
previouslystored carbon when the bogs dry out. Id. On average, 516
tons of carbon are stored per acre of peatland, by far the largest
level of carbon sequestration of any organic system. Multiplying
the 516 tons per acre by the number of acres destroyed in tar sands
extraction adds up very quickly, compounding the extremely negative
carbon equation of tar sands exploitation.155 To get a true sense of
the life cycle GHG emissions attributable to tar sands oil, the GHG
emissions generated during extraction and upgrading must be added to
the emissions generated by refining the tar sands crude into final
petroleum products and to the emissions associated with combustion or
the final end use of those fuels.  Ron Sahu, a mechanical engineer,
with over 17 years of engineering, environmental, and energy consulting
experience in the petroleum refining industry, calculated the “well
to wheel” CO2 emissions attributable to the similarly-situated
Alberta Clipper tar sands pipeline project, for which DOS issued
a Presidential Permit in early 2008.156 Based on a review of the
scientific literature and various available methodologies, Dr. Sahu
determined that approximately 200 kg equivalent CO2 is emitted for
every cubic meter of “bitumen blend,” or heavy crude refined and
the life cycle figure per cubic meter of bitumen blend is just over
3500 kg CO2 equivalent.157 Using the ultimate capacity of the Alberta
Clipper pipeline – 800,000 barrels per day – Dr. Sahu calculated
that the CO2 equivalent emitted from refining Alberta Clipper crude
alone would be approximately 18.77 million kg per day or over 7.5
million tons per year; and the life cycle CO2 equivalent emitted
by the pipeline would be approximately 328.5 million kg per day, or
approximately 132 million tons per year.158 Dr. Sahu’s reasoning
can be applied to calculate the GHG emissions associated with the
Keystone XL pipeline, as the projects are substantially similar. The
only significant differences between the two pipelines are their
routes and ultimate capacity. Because both pipelines will 155

See also, National Wildlife Federation, “Staying
Hooked on a Dirty Fuel: Why Canadian Tar Sands
Pipelines are Bad for the United States” at 17 (2010), available at
http://www.nwf.org/News-and-Magazines/MediaCenter/Reports/Archive/2010/~/media/PDFs/Global%20Warming/Reports/NWF_TarSands_final
.ashx (last visited June 8, 2010) and attached as Exhibit 71.
156 Declaration of Ranajit Sahu ¶ 2-3. Ron Sahu’s declaration and
supporting materials are attached hereto as Exhibit 72.  157 Id. ¶ 15.
158 Id.  59

transport the same type of heavy crude from Alberta to
U.S. refineries, we can assume that approximately 200 kg equivalent
CO2 is emitted for every cubic meter of Keystone XL crude refined,
and the life cycle figure per cubic meter is just over 3500 kg CO2
equivalent. The Keystone Xl pipeline will have an ultimate capacity of
900,000 barrels of crude per day.  Therefore, the refining of Keystone
XL crude alone would emit 21.11 million kg of CO2 equivalent per day,
or over 8.4 million tons per year. The life-cyle CO2 equivalent
emitted by Keystone XL would be approximately 369.6 million kg
per day, or approximately 149 million tons per year.159 Over the
pipeline’s expected lifetime of 50 years or more, the project can
be expected to contribute at least 7.4 billion tons of CO2 equivalent
to the earth’s atmosphere.  By any standards, 149 million tons
per year is a significant figure. A large coal-fired power plant
may generate 5 to 10 million tons of CO2 equivalent per year and
the entire state of Montana is projected to emit 38.5 million metric
tons of CO2 equivalent in 2010.160 Because these emissions will have
severe impacts on the health, welfare, economy, and environment
of the region, the nation, and the planet as a whole, the State
Department should conclude that the Keystone XL project has severe
unmitigated adverse environmental impacts and reject the application
for a Presidential Permit.  By contrast, the DEIS concludes that
“refining the crude oil transported by the project would result in
total emissions in the range of 1.3 to 17.2 million tons of CO2 per
year.” DEIS at 3.14-41. This range is a drastic underestimation of
actual GHG emissions associated with this project. Any subsequent NEPA
document must consider the full life-cycle GHG emissions to provide
decision makers with a clearer of the true climate change impacts.  c.

The DEIS fails to analyze the indirect emissions resulting from
the pipeline.

The DEIS does not adequately address the Keystone XL project’s
global warming impacts. The few pages of the DEIS that the State
Department devotes to the impacts of greenhouse gas emission fails to
comprehensively describe or quantify the indirect emissions of GHGs
and does not analyze the local, regional, or global environmental
impacts of CO2 emissions from the Keystone XL pipeline and
related facilities. The DEIS is also flawed because it fails to
consider the economic impacts of CO2 emissions from the project.
The DEIS considers the direct GHGs emitted during the three years
of pipeline construction, (235,378 tons of GHG equivalent), mainly
from the combustion of diesel fuel by construction equipment and
vehicles. DEIS at 3.14-39. It also estimates the total GHG emissions
from the operation of pipeline to be approximately 85 tons of CO2
equivalent per year. This projection fails to consider the GHGs
emitted as a result of the necessary electrical generation during
construction and operation of the pipeline, which the DEIS notes may
be approximately 159

Id.  Alison Bailie, et. al., “Montana Greenhouse Gas
Inventory and Reference Case Projections 1990-2020,”
at v, (Center for Climate Strategies), 2007, available at
http://www.mtclimatechange.us/ewebeditpro/items/O127F13145.pdf (last
visited June 8, 2010) and attached as Exhibit 73.  160

4.4 million tons per year. There is absolutely no discussion or
reasoning to support this estimation, no alternatives proposed that
would result in less electricity required, and no mitigation measures
proposed.  The DEIS also applies a number of different methodologies to
calculate the GHG emissions from refining the oil transported by the
pipeline and concludes that refining the oil transported by Keystone
XL would result in total carbon emissions in the range of 1.3 to 17.2
million tons of CO2 per year. DEIS at.14-41. The DEIS only assesses
the significance of the GHG emissions associated with operation and
construction of the pipeline, concluding that “It is estimated that
the amount of GHG emissions from Project construction and operations
should not constitute a substantial contribution to the U.S. or
global emissions due to the low percentage emission presented above,
as compared with national and global emissions.” Id. at 3.14-41.
This conclusion fails to consider the total life-cycle GHG impacts
(including the construction and operation of the pipeline, the
extraction, upgrading, processing, and refining of the tar sands crude
oil, and the end-use combustion of the refined product) as compared to
U.S. and global emissions.  The analysis of GHG emissions in the DEIS
does not account for (1) refinery upgrades and expansions necessary
to accommodate the increased volumes delivered by the pipelines;
(2) the upstream emissions generated by the increased tar sands
development induced by increased US transport and refining capacity;
(3) the reasonably foreseeable future expansion of the Keystone XL
pipeline capacity from 700,000 to 900,000 barrels per day; (4) the
cumulative impacts of refining crude delivered by similar and connected
pipeline expansions; or (5) the downstream use of the oil. Because it
omits these significant indirect and cumulative sources of greenhouse
emissions the State Department’s treatment of the global warming
impacts is inadequate.  Finally, despite the significant emissions
of greenhouse gases resulting from the project, the DEIS fails to
assess the impacts of global warming pollution on any environmental
receptor such as wildlife, vegetation, water resources, humans, or
land. Nor does the DEIS consider the economic impacts of emitting 149
million tons of CO2 equivalent annually. Peer reviewed studies have
been performed modeling the economic costs of global warming and CO2
emissions.161 For example, it has been estimated that each ton of CO2
emitted causes approximately $85 in damage. Id. This indicates that
the true cost of the pipeline amounts to approximately 12.6 billion
dollars per year, which is a cost that is bourn by society at large.
These impacts of the project must be fully analyzed before the EIS
is finalized. Center for Biological Diversity v. National Highway
Traffic Safety Administration, 508 F.3d 508, 550 (9th Cir. 2007)
(“The impact of greenhouse gas emissions on climate change is
precisely the kind of cumulative impacts analysis that NEPA requires
agencies to conduct.”).  161

Nicholas Stern, “Stern Review on the Economics of Climate
Change,” Cambridge University Press (October 2006), available at
http://www.hm-treasury.gov.uk/sternreview_index.htm (last visited
June 8, 2010). Commenters have not included hard copies of this report
because it is lengthy. Commenters wish to have the full report, with
appendices, made part of the administrative record in this matter. If
DOS requires hard copies of the report for purposes of the record,
Commenters will supply them.  61

d.

The DEIS fails to consider the climate impacts of black carbon

The DEIS failed utterly to assess the climate forcing effects of
significant black carbon emissions associated with the project. A
rapidly growing body of scientific literature published since the
Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change identifies black carbon, a component of fine particulate matter
(PM2.5), as a critical climate forcing agent, and suggests that
reducing these emissions may be among the most effective near-term
strategies for slowing Arctic warming and the melting of sea ice, the
Greenland ice sheet, and glaciers and snow pack around the world.162
It has been estimated that the “soot effect on snow albedo may
be responsible for a quarter of observed global warming.”163 The
proposed Keystone XL pipeline will involve multiple, significant
sources of black carbon/ PM2.5 emissions. Many of these sources,
particularly those sources related to the extraction of tar sands to
supply the pipeline, are not considered in the DEIS. Additionally, even
where PM2.5 emissions are noted, for example from diesel construction
equipment, the DEIS fails to assess the significant climate forcing
effect of the black carbon fraction of those emissions – the
Environmental Protection Agency estimates the black carbon fraction
of diesel PM2.5 emissions to be over 60% on average.  i.

Black carbon is a potent climate forcing agent.

Black carbon exerts both direct and indirect climate forcing
effects. Black carbon is a potent climate warming agent in the
atmosphere and when deposited on snow and ice, exerting a forcing
effect through direct absorption of heat in the top of the atmosphere,
changing cloud dynamics, and reducing albedo, or reflectivity.
The direct absorption of sunlight by black carbon heats the
atmosphere; it is here that ratio of black to organic carbon,
and the net climate forcing effect, is critical to consider.164
But black carbon also nucleates clouds, increasing cloud droplet
concentrations and thickening lowlevel clouds that trap more of the
Earth’s radiated heat.165 (Black carbon is a significant component
of Arctic haze.) Moreover, the radiative forcing of suspended black
carbon particles is thought to be amplified at the poles, where there
is more light reflected from the Earth’s surface, and thus more
light available for the black carbon particles to absorb.

Ramanathan and Carmichael, “Global and Regional Climate Changes
Due to Black Carbon,” Nature Geosience (April 2008), attached as
Exhibit 74.  163 Hansen, J & L. Nazarenko, Soot Climate Forcing
Via Snow and Ice Albedos, 101 Proc. of the Nat’l Acad. Of
Sci. 423 (13 January 2004), attached as Exhibit 75.  164 Bond,
T. C., D. G. Streets, K. F. Yarber, S. M. Nelson, J.-H. Woo, and
Z. Klimont, A technology-based global inventory of black and organic
carbon emissions from combustion, J.  Geophys. Res., 109(D14203),
doi:10.1029/2003JD003,697 (2004), attached as Exhibit 76.  165 Id.  62

Black carbon also warms when it is deposited on snow and ice. Surface
deposition of black carbon darkens snow and ice, reducing the albedo,
or reflectivity, of these bright surfaces.  “Soot deposition
increases surface melt on ice masses, and the melt water spurs
multiple radiative and dynamic feedback processes that accelerate ice
disintegration.”166 Melting reveals darker water or ground below;
these darker surfaces in turn absorb more incoming sunlight, which
causes additional warming.i ii.

Sources of Arctic deposition of black carbon

Black carbon may be transported long distances from the source of
emissions. Most black carbon that deposits in the Arctic originates
as fuel combustion by-products emitted in northern hemisphere in
Eurasia and North America, primarily north of 40º latitude.167 Each
region of the world has a unique mix of natural and pollution aerosol
sources that cause complex climate effects. The diesel vehicle and
certain industry sectors are particularly important sources in North
America and Europe. Black carbon emissions in the Arctic from diesel
vehicles and generators, oil and gas flaring and marine transport
have a significant impact as well.168 The top two U.S. sources of
net climate forcing black emissions according to the Environmental
Protection Agency are non-road diesel and on-road diesel.  iii.

Climate warming black carbon emissions related to the Keystone
XL Pipeline

The myriad on and off-road diesel vehicles, generators, construction
equipment and earth moving equipment associated with construction of
the pipeline and related facilities, tar sands extraction, as well
as the oil sands plants in Alberta, are all significant sources of
particulate matter, and thus black carbon, emissions. As they are all
located above 40 degrees latitude, they are of particular concern as
these emissions are the major source of black carbon deposition in
the Arctic. (The DEIS mentions only that diesel generators will be
installed for backup power at the Superior Terminal without noting
either the climate or health impacts of black carbon emissions.) The
particulate emissions associated with refining the tar sands oil should
also be considered in the context of their global warming impacts.
According to a recent article in the Toronto Star169 quoting an
Environment Canada study obtained under the Access to Information Act,
increases in production at Alberta's oil sands plants will result in
a net increase in conventional air pollution. The report indicates
that particulate matter emissions would increase by more than 60
percent. The DEIS should consider

Hansen, J & L. Nazarenko, supra note 163.  Id.  168 McConnell,
J.R., Edwards, R., Kok, G.L., Flanner, M.G., Zender, C.S.,
Saltzman, E.S., Banta, J.R., Pasteris, D.R., Carter, M.M. and
J.D.W. Kahl. 2007. 20th-Century Industrial Black Carbon Emissions
Altered Arctic Climate Forcing. Science, 317: 1381-1384,
attached as Exhibit 77.  169 Woods, A. “Tar Sands Smog Seen
Worsening.” The Toronto Star. 21 January 2009, available at
http://www.thestar.com/News/Canada/article/574514 (last visited June 8,
2010), and attached as Exhibit 78.  167

the increased emissions that result from increased tar sands
development to supply the Keystone XL and related pipelines in
the US.  e.

The DEIS does not adequately address climate tipping points

Another example of inadequate context and information is the lack of
analysis of thresholds of climate change, or tipping points. This
is an important aspect of the environmental setting in which this
proposed project will operate, and is a cumulative impact that must
be considered in any subsequent NEPA document.  The CEQ regulations
require that an agency “evaluate reasonably foreseeable significant
environmental effects on the human environment,” even where
information relevant to making this evaluation is “incomplete or
unavailable.” 40 C.F.R. § 1502.22. If this is the case, the agency
must clearly show that the information is “lacking” by providing
what credible scientific information it does have on these reasonably
foreseeable impacts and making an effort to analyze these impacts based
on this information. Id. What information the agency must provide
depends upon the costs of obtaining the information. See id.  For
example, the agency must include “information relevant to reasonably
foreseeable adverse impacts,” even if it is “incomplete,”
if it is “essential to a reasoned choice among alternatives and
the overall costs of obtaining it aren’t exorbitant.” Id. at
§ 1502.22(a). Even where the costs are exorbitant, or the means of
obtaining the information are unknown, the agency must still provide
information on reasonably foreseeable adverse impacts. This information
includes: (1) A statement that such information is incomplete or
unavailable; (2) a statement of the relevance of the incomplete
or unavailable information to evaluating reasonably foreseeable
significant adverse impacts on the human environment; (3) a summary of
existing credible scientific evidence which is relevant to evaluating
the reasonably foreseeable significant adverse impacts on the human
environment, and (4) the agency's evaluation of such impacts based
upon theoretical approaches or research methods generally accepted in
the scientific community.  Id. at § 1502.22(b). Under this section,
reasonably foreseeable “includes impacts which have catastrophic
consequences, even if their probability of occurrence is low, provided
that the analysis of the impacts is supported by credible scientific
evidence, is not based on pure conjecture, and is within the rule of
reason.” Id.  The DEIS contains no information on tipping points
and the dangerous impacts of irreversible climate change. By failing
to include this information, one can only conclude that DOS believed
the information to be “incomplete or unavailable.” As such, the
DEIS violates NEPA.  It is well accepted that there will be tipping
points, and ample evidence demonstrates that unchecked greenhouse
gas emissions will also result in irreversible climate change. In fact,

various studies have attempted to quantify when such a threshold
may be reached. In its report, for example, the IPCC concluded: •

Continued greenhouse gas emissions at or above current rates are
expected to cause further warming and to induce many changes during
the 21st century that will very likely be larger than those of the
20th century.

● Anthropogenic warming and sea level rise would continue for
centuries due to the time scales associated with climate processes and
feedbacks, even if greenhouse gas concentrations were to be stabilized.
● With current global climate change mitigation policies and related
sustainable development practices, global GHG emissions will continue
to grow over the next few decades.  ● In order to stabilize the
concentrations of GHGs in the atmosphere, emissions would need to peak
and decline thereafter.  Rajendra Pachauri, a scientist and economist
who heads the IPCC asserts, “If there is no action before 2012,
that’s too late…. What we do in the next two to three years will
determine our future. This is the defining moment.” Similarly, the
International Energy Agency (“IEA”) has warned, “Urgent action
is needed if greenhouse-gas concentrations are to be stabilised [sic]
at a level that would prevent dangerous interference with the climate
system.” Dr. James Hansen and colleagues recently warned that that
prolonged time spent over 350 ppm CO2 will result in catastrophic
impacts. (Previous estimates considered 450 ppm the threshold for
catastrophic climate change.) The present global mean of CO2 is 385
ppm, already putting us in the “dangerous zone” for experiencing
such impacts. Hansen and his colleagues used “paleoclimate data
to show that long-term climate has high sensitivity to climate
forcings,” making the 385 ppm number alarming. They concluded:
If humanity wishes to preserve a planet similar to that on which
civilization developed and to which life on Earth is adapted,
paleoclimate evidence and ongoing climate change suggest that CO2 will
need to be reduced from its current 385 ppm to at most 350 ppm, but
likely less than that. The largest uncertainty in the target arises
from possible changes of non-CO2 forcings. An initial 350 ppm CO2
target may be achievable by phasing out coal use except where CO2
is captured and adopting agricultural and forestry practices that
sequester carbon. If the present overshoot of this target CO2 is not
brief, there is a possibility of seeding irreversible catastrophic
effects.  Due to the slow response time for the full effects of
anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions to be manifested in the climate
system, “[w]arming ‘in the pipeline’, mostly attributable to
slow feedbacks, is now about 2°C. No additional forcing is required
to raise global temperature to at least the level of the Pliocene,
2-3 million years ago, a degree of warming that would surely yield
‘dangerous’ climate impacts.”

Hansen et al. (2008) define several concepts: “(1) the tipping
level, the global climate forcing that, if long maintained, gives
rise to a specific consequence, and (2) the point of no return,
a climate state beyond which the consequence is inevitable, even if
climate forcings are reduced. A point of no return can be avoided,
even if the tipping level is temporarily exceeded.  Ocean and ice
sheet inertia permit overshoot, provided the climate forcing is
returned below the tipping level before initiating irreversible
dynamic change.” Based on paleoclimate data, Hansen and colleagues
have estimated that remaining at CO2 concentrations above 350 for
a prolonged period of time is likely to invoke tipping points.
Paleoclimate data also indicate that in the past, at temperatures
expected to be reached by 2100, Greenland and Antarctica contributed
several meters to sea level. The rate of rise at this temperature
was approximately 1.6m/century. Thus, the current CO2 level of
385 ppm is not only “dangerous,” but potentially catastrophic
and could lead to tipping points this century.  Reaching any single
tipping point can bring severe economic and ecological consequences.
Perhaps more worrisome is the linkage between tipping points such
that reaching one tipping point may in turn trigger a second. An
example is the connection between Arctic sea ice and permafrost melt
rates. Permafrost refers to permanently frozen land; this surface
stores large amounts of carbon. As permafrost thaws under the heat
of global warming, it releases carbon, often as methane. Methane
has a global warming potential more than 21 times greater than
that of CO2 over 100 years. The release of methane as permafrost
thaws creates a positive feedback loop that may result in a climate
tipping point. Recent evidence indicates that the loss of Arctic
sea ice, one tipping point, accelerates permafrost thaw, a second
tipping point. The multiplicative effect of reaching several tipping
points on a similar time scale would drastically increase the costs
associated with climate change.  Given these scientific conclusions,
it is clear that atmospheric CO2 concentrations must be reduced
quickly: “Indeed, if the world continues on a business-as-usual
path for even another decade ... prospects for avoiding a dangerously
large, extended overshoot of the 350 ppm level will be dim.” Yet,
as Hansen et al. (2008) note, the “[r]ealization that we must
reduce the current CO2 amount has a bright side: effects that had
begun to seem inevitable, including impacts of ocean acidification,
loss of fresh water supplies, and shifting of climatic zones, may be
averted by the necessity of finding an energy course beyond fossil
fuels sooner than would otherwise have occurred.” Ultimately, these
authors conclude: [w]ith simultaneous policies to reduce non-CO2
greenhouse gases, it appears still feasible to avert catastrophic
climate change…. We must begin to move now toward the era beyond
fossil fuels. Continued growth of greenhouse gas emissions, for just
another decade, practically eliminates the possibility of nearterm
return of atmospheric composition beneath the tipping level for
catastrophic effects…. The stakes, for all life on the planet,
surpass those of any previous crisis. The greatest danger is continued
ignorance and denial, which could make tragic consequences unavoidable.

Other research suggests that at least some of the impacts of climate
change will be irreversible. A recent paper in the Proceedings of
the National Academy of Science, found that, “the climate change
that takes place due to increases in carbon dioxide concentrations
is largely irreversible for 1,000 years after emissions stop.”
Such impacts may include rainfall decreases, creating Dust Bowl
like conditions in the American Southwest, and sea level rise. These
findings thus challenge the notion that the impacts of climate change
can be stopped at a later date and that action can be postponed.
While no one may be able to predict with certainty on exactly which
date a threshold for abrupt climate change may be reached, ample
evidence suggests that unchecked greenhouse emissions will result
in rapid climate change. Extensive evidence also exists showing that
among the many consequences of climate change, “tipping points”
carry the greatest threat to wildlife, human welfare, and economic
security. Thus, rapid climate change is a reasonably foreseeable
adverse impact of continuing fossil fuel consumption which this coal
mine will continue to encourage.  The costs of obtaining and explaining
this information as part of the environmental setting in which DOS is
making its decision is, obviously, not exorbitant. Even if it were,
DOS failed to meet the standards of 40 C.F.R. § 1502.22(b). Credible
scientific evidence exists on the chances and likely impacts of
abrupt climate change. As such, DOS must provide this information
and consider it in its alternatives analysis.  In sum, by failing to
disclose the true nature of climate change, the DEIS is fatally flawed,
as DOS is required to “describe the environment of the area to be
affected or created by the alternatives under consideration.” 40
C.F.R. § 1502.15. The establishment of the baseline conditions of
the affected environment is a fundamental, practical requirement
of the NEPA process. See Half Moon Bay Fisherman’s Marketing
Ass’n v. Carlucci, 857 F.2d 505, 510 (9th Cir. 1988) (“[w]ithout
establishing ... baseline conditions ... there is simply no way to
determine what effect [an action] will have on the environment, and
consequently, no way to comply with NEPA.”). To comply with NEPA,
the DEIS must be revised to include this information and recirculate
for public comment.  5.

Impacts of downstream or end uses

The DEIS fails to adequately consider the downstream impacts of
refining the heavy crude oil and using the finished petroleum
product (most likely combustion of transportation fuels). In fact,
the DEIS is completely silent on the issue of end use combustion
of the Project’s crude oil supplied by the project. See DEIS at
3.14-1–43. This glaring omission renders the DEIS in violation
of NEPA and NEPA regulations. DOS must re-issue a DEIS that fully
analyzes the life-cycle GHG emissions from the transported crude oil,
including the likely combustion of the refined product by consumers.
Assessment of the indirect impacts of increased imports of tar sands
oil must include consideration of the air quality and climate change
impacts of increased consumption of liquid petroleum-based fuels. In
Mid-States Coalition for Progress v. Surface Transp. Board, 345 F.3d

520 (8th Cir. 2003), the Eighth Circuit held that the agency must
include analysis of the indirect impacts from increased use of coal in
an EIS examining a railroad intended to deliver coal from the Powder
River Basin in Wyoming to midwestern and eastern utilities. The court
noted that the increased coal use was likely and foreseeable and
the environmental effects of burning more coal must be included in
the EIS. Id. at 549. Similarly here, the Keystone XL pipeline will
insert up to 900,000 barrels per day (and combined with other tar
sands pipelines currently being built or planned in Minnesota and
across the Upper Midwest over 2 million barrels per day) into the
energy markets for refining into liquid fuels. The State Department
must examine the full suite of environmental effects, not just from
Keystone XL, but from the similar, and/or connected pipelines, from the
resulting increases in tar sands extraction operations, the related
refineries, and from the very use of the tar sands-derived fuel in
the U.S.  The DEIS states that as a result of the refining process,
the emissions associated with the end use of the oil by the consumer
are not expected to be influenced by the source oil and that therefore
end use emissions are not impacted by increased use of heavier crude
oil. DEIS at 3.14-36. However, this analysis fails to recognize that
increased access to tar sands oil will support refining and keep
petroleum prices lower than without it, with the obvious impact of
continuing to allow the increase of petroleum use. As the court in
Mid-States Coalition for Progress held: The increased availability of
inexpensive coal will at the very least make coal a more attractive
option to future entrants into the utilities market when compared with
other potential fuel sources, such as nuclear power, solar power,
or natural gas. Even if this project will not affect the short-term
demand for coal, which is possible since most existing utilities are
singlesource dependent, it will most assuredly affect the nation's
long-term demand for coal.  345 F.3d at 549. Similarly here, the
increased access to crude oil provided by Keystone XL increases the use
of oil-based liquid fuels relative to alternative fuel sources. Thus
the likely and foreseeable environmental effects of burning more
liquid fossil fuels, including the air and water quality impacts
and the displacement effects on the development of renewable fuel
sources, must be included in the EIS.  The relevant comparison is not
the combustion of fuels derived from heavy synthetic crude compared
to those derived from conventional crude oil. Instead, the impacts
of combustion and use of heavy synthetic fuels should be compared to
other reasonable alternatives such increased use of alternative fuels
and improving energy efficiency and thus reducing demand for oil.
The DEIS notes that the heavy crude oil supplied by this project will
be used in many applications other than transportation fuel, including
power generation. DEIS at 3.14-36. Thus the DEIS must consider how
and to what extent the availability of heavy crude oil will displace
each type of alternative and renewable fuel source and initiative,
including but not limited to wind, solar, geothermal, nuclear and
natural gas power generation; energy efficiency and public

transportation initiatives; and electric, hybrid, and biofuel other
high efficiency automobiles; and energy efficient heating systems
and designs for homes and buildings.  D.

The DEIS does not adequately address the impacts on wetlands and
water resources.  1.

The overall lack of information on impacts, avoidance, mitigation
measures and justification for adopted alternatives in the DEIS
violates both the CWA and NEPA

Under the federal Clean Water Act (CWA), discharges of pollutants,
including dredged and fill material, are prohibited unless permitted
pursuant to the Act.170 In order for discharges of dredged and fill
to be permitted under the Act by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
(Corps or USACE), a “sequencing” analysis must occur.171 First,
impacts to wetlands must be avoided; then minimized; and finally,
to the extent impacts are unavoidable, compensated.172 For nonwater
dependent projects, CWA regulations do not allow for a permit to
be issued if a practicable alternative to the discharge exists that
would have a less impact on aquatic water resources.173 Mitigation
is a last resort to be used only to compensate for impacts that
could not be avoided or minimized.  The DEIS relies almost solely
on mitigation measures in its analysis of impacts to wetlands and
streams. This fails to comply with both the CWA and NEPA.  The DEIS
does not demonstrate that efforts were properly made to avoid or
minimize wetland, stream and river impacts. It fails to quantify
the extent to which CWA mitigation requirements will even apply to
wetlands and streams that will be impacted, leaving a very openended
statement that “requirements for compensatory mitigation would depend
on final USACE decisions on jurisdictional determinations.”174 As
detailed below, the pipeline will cross vital water resources the
Corps has not been protecting under the Act, meaning that no CWA
permitting or mitigation requirements would apply. As such, impacts
to water resources are not properly accounted for and analyzed under
the DEIS.  The DEIS also makes clear that the project fails to comply
with basic requirements of the CWA. As discussed in these comments
above, the purpose and need of this project is unlawfully narrow and
not substantiated. A proper purpose and need would reveal that a this
project is not necessary to meet energy needs. As such, the No-Action
Alternative is the practicable alternative with the least damage
to the aquatic environment. Thus, the currently proposed impacts to
hundreds of rivers and streams and several hundred acres of wetlands
should not be permitted under Section 404 and should not be allowed.

33 U.S.C. § 1311(a).  33 U.S.C. § 1344; 40 C.F.R. § 230.10(a).
172 33 U.S.C. § 1344(b)(1); 40 C.F.R. § 230.10(a).  173 40 C.F.R. §
230.10(a).  174 DEIS at 3.4--12.  171

System alternatives would also have less impact on water resources
and be practicable.  As the DEIS states: “A system alternative
would render construction of the pipeline unnecessary, although some
modifications or additions to other existing pipeline systems would be
required to increase the current capacity of those systems.”175 As
stated in these comments above, the DEIS projected demand well exceeds
what EIA has demonstrated future demand to be. Although existing
pipelines like the ExxonMobil Pegasus may not be able to accommodate
the 900,000 bpd that the Keystone pipeline can carry, demand does not
show such carrying capacity is needed. As such, it is possible use
of existing pipelines could meet the need of this project, thus being
practicable, and would avoid and minimize impacts to water resources
as required by law.  Again, this practicable alternative would almost
certainly result in far less impact to aquatic resources and should
demand that CWA permits not be issued for the impacts associated
with the preferred alternative.  Similarly, the DEIS dismisses
use of other planned pipelines (such as the Altex, ChinookMaple
Leaf, Trailbreaker, and Enbridge-BP Delivery System pipelines) as
alternatives to building the Keystone XL on the basis that “[p]art
of the purpose and need of the Project is to provide up to 900,000 bpd
of crude oil to PADD III in as short a timeframe as possible.”176
Again, the assumptions about the amount of capacity needed are
baseless. A proper assessment based on an appropriate purpose and
need would likely demonstrate that the project is not needed at all,
and that any carrying capacity needed could be accommodated by other
proposed pipelines177 with overall minimization of impacts to water
resources. This again leads to a conclusion that impacts for this
project cannot be permitted under the CWA.  In terms of pipeline
placement, while the DEIS states that decisions regarding placement
considered a variety of factors, including environmental concerns
and avoidance of large wetland complexes and large waterbodies,
it makes no mention of attempting to avoid smaller resources.178 As
stated in the DEIS, the vast majority of impacted streams and wetlands
are smaller resources (e.g., 350 of 389 stream crossings in MT are
to intermittent/ephemeral streams; for SD the number is 331 of 354
crossing; for NE, 127 of 160 crossings; for OK, 273 of 368; for TX,
413 of 633 crossings). There is no indication that the pipeline route
was chosen in a manner that would avoid or minimize impacts to these
vital resources. Moreover, the DEIS explicitly states that expediency
was an overriding concern in pipeline placement: “Development of
alternatives also considered the desire to reduce the line miles of
pipeline that would be required to reach the Project terminus.”179
A look at a map of the pipeline route shows that the desire to create
a direct route was an overriding concern.180 There is no indication
in the DEIS that appropriate consideration was given to modifying
the pipeline route to avoid smaller water 175

DEIS at 4-5.  DEIS at 4-7.  177 Our organizations are firmly of
the position that no new pipeline is needed and that fuel from this
project is not necessary to meet energy needs. However, to the extent
any pipeline is deemed necessary, it certainly need not be of this
capacity, it need not be built in the timeframe of this project, and
need not be built in addition to other proposed pipelines.  178 DEIS
at 4-9 –10.  179 DEIS at 4-10.  180 E.g., DEIS at Fig. 1.1-1.  176

resources. The excuses given for not choosing routes that would have
less impacts to water resources are not tenable and fails to makes
those alternatives not “practicable.” This shows that, again,
the project does not meet basic permitting CWA requirements. It
also violates NEPA by not properly examining impacts to smaller
water resources – the vast majority of those impacted – and not
appropriately comparing the various impacts of alternatives to the
preferred alternative.  The dismissed “Western Alternative,” is
one such alternative that may be both practicable and less damaging
to water resources. The DEIS admits that “[p]otential positive
attributes to this alternative include the avoidance of the Missouri
River crossing just to the east of the Fort Peck Reservoir and the
avoidance of crossings of reaches of the Niobrara River that have
been included with the federal Wild and Scenic River program.”181
Not mentioned, but also a potential reduction in impacts to water
resources of this more westerly route, is the avoidance of vital
and sensitive prairie potholes generally located in the more eastern
portions of Montana and South Dakota.  Additionally, the preferred
Gulf Coast Section alternative (GCS-A) has considerable more impacts
to wetlands than the rejected alternative (GCS-B), which is only 6
miles longer.182 GCS-A has more than 280 acres of impacts than GCS-B
(853.3 compared to 573.3). The cited reason for rejected GCS-B is its
“greater length” and “associated greater area of impact and
[stream/river] crossings.”183 Yet, while this alternative does
have more waterway crossings, the difference in wetland impacts
(280 less acres of impacts for the rejected alternative) dwarfs the
difference in stream crossings (13.2 more acres of impacts).184 The
added six miles of length hardly makes this alternative impracticable,
especially when almost 98% of this rejected alternative would parallel
existing ROWs of other linear facilities.185 Similarly, the preferred
route for the Houston Lateral section (Houston Lateral Alternative A)
has significantly more wetland impacts (236.5 acres to 165.5 acres)
than the rejected alternative (Houston Lateral Alternative B).186
While the rejected alternative is longer, has more stream crossings,
and may have more difficulty in terms of meeting compliance with the
Coastal Zone Management Act, there is still an inadequate showing that
the route is not practicable and does not have less overall impact
on aquatic resources than the alternative route chosen.  Likewise,
crossing methods do not appropriately seek to avoid and minimize
impacts to water resources in violation of the CWA. Rather than
ensuring the least environmentally damaging practicable alternative
is used, convenience seems to be the overriding concern in regards to
which crossing methods are used. This fails to comply with the law. For
instance, the DEIS states that “[a]pproximately 621 intermittent
waterbodies would be crossed by the proposed Project (Appendix E). In
the event that these intermittent waterbodies are dry or 181

DEIS at 4-17.  DEIS at 4-19, tbl 4.3.5-1.  183 DEIS at 4-19.  184 DEIS
at tbl. 4.3.5-1.  185 DEIS at 4.3.5.2-19.  186 DEIS at tbl. 4.3.6-1.

stagnant at the time of crossing, conventional upland cross-country
construction techniques would be used. The pipeline would be installed
with the open-cut wet crossing method if water is flowing at the
time of installation. The specific method used for each crossing
would be based on site-specific analyses of conditions at the time of
installation so that the method selected would result in lower levels
of environmental impact.”187 However, the DEIS does not indicate
that efforts will be made to ensure that the timing of the crossing
will result in the least amount of damage to water resources. Given
relatively predictable changes in flow rates throughout the year,
achieving the lowest level of environmental impact may depend greatly
on when crossings occur, allowing crossing to happen at times of low
or no flow when impacts would be reduced and less environmentally
damaging methods could be used. It is practicable to time crossings
in such a manner as to reduce impacts.  Similarly, crossing methods
for many streams seem to be improperly allowed to occur at the whim
of land owners and managers, again in violation of the CWA. “The
actual crossing method employed at an individual perennial stream would
depend on permit conditions from USACE and other relevant regulatory
agencies, as well as additional conditions that may be imposed by
landowners or land managers at crossing locations.”188 The DEIS also
does not address the fact that the Corps of Engineers may decline to
find jurisdiction over certain stream crossings (see below), meaning
that for some streams no CWA permit conditions may apply.  Thus, this
analysis falls short under NEPA as well, as it fails to adequately
assess possible impacts from stream crossings. To comply with NEPA,
the DEIS must analyze the possible impacts from the Corps not asserting
jurisdiction over certain water resources.  The analysis of wetlands
crossings also demonstrates a failure to comply with the CWA, as
the timing of the crossings are more concerned with convenience than
reducing impacts. The DEIS states that, “Pipeline construction across
wetlands would be similar to typical conventional upland cross-country
construction procedures, with modifications to reduce the potential
for affects to wetland hydrology and soil structure. The wetland
crossing methods used would depend largely on the stability of the
soils at the location at time of construction.”189 As with streams,
there is no attempt to ensure crossings are timed during periods of
lower water or other times to ensure an avoidance or minimization
of impacts.  This failure similarly violates NEPA, as wetland impacts
could vary greatly depending on the time of construction. With no
accurate accounting for when crossings will occur, the DEIS does
not adequately assess the impacts to wetlands from the project. To
be protective of wetlands, DOS should require that dry crossings
should occur unless TransCanada can demonstrate that such crossings
are impracticable or not possible.  Crossing methods also appear to
violate the CWA and are not properly examined under NEPA. Other than
38 streams that would be crossed using the Horizontal Directional
Drilling (HDD) method, the DEIS indicates that “preferred crossing
method” is the open-cut crossing method, which is the method with
the most environmental impacts.190 An open cut allows 187

DEIS at 2-30.  DEIS at 2-27 – 28.  189 DEIS at 2-31.  190 DEIS at
2-28 – 29.  188

substantial downstream sedimentation, since excavation, pipeline
placement, and back fill all occur in flowing water. There are a total
of 341 perennial waterbodies and 621 intermittent waterbodies. Aside
from the 38 that will be crossed by the HDD method, there is no
requirement that less damaging alternatives to open-cut will be used
and only a statement that dam-and-pump and flume crossings will be
used “where technically feasible” or “where practicable”
on unspecified “environmentally sensitive waterbodies.”191
Dam-and-pump and flume crossings are standard techniques in the
pipeline industry for achieving a dry crossing and are therefore
practicable. DOS should examine the impacts of not using the least
damaging practicable crossing methods. It should also discuss an
alternative mitigation measure where dry crossings of waterbodies are
the preferred method unless Keystone provides information that such
a crossing is infeasible or impractical.  In violation of NEPA the
DEIS also does not demonstrate that stream banks will be properly
restored and does not adequately analyze the impacts of failing
to restore such banks.  The DEIS states that “[a]fter pipeline
installation, stream banks would be restored to preconstruction
contours or to a stable configuration.”192 Stable configuration
could mean the use of “rock riprap, gabion baskets (rock enclosed
in wire bins), log walls, geogrids, willow cuttings, or alternative
wood-based structured where required by regulatory authorities.”193
Stabilization methods like riprap, log walls and other methods, can
often have severe deleterious impacts on streams. They can alter
or negatively impact important functions such as stream evolution
processes, riparian succession, sedimentation processes, habitat,
and biological community interactions, with resulting adverse impacts
to aquatic wildlife.194 This means that once functional banks could
be made stable, but have important functions permanently degraded.
These impacts are not assessed by the DEIS.  The DEIS further notes
several impacts to water resources that could potentially be severe,
but fails to quantify or describe them in a manner that provides
meaningful information regarding the severity of the impacts. This
violates NEPA. For instance, the DEIS states that the project
will result in “[t]emporary increase in turbidity and changes
in wetland hydrology and water quality.”195 However, how long
is temporary? And when will the impacts occur? During times when,
for instance, certain aquatic life may be breeding or foraging and
could be dramatically impacted by turbidity? And will the turbidity
and sedimentation cause long-term problems such as destruction or
degradation or fish or amphibian breeding habitat? The DEIS leaves
these important issues unaddressed.  2.

The DEIS violates NEPA by failing to take into account the impacts
of climate change on water resources

Science is clear that climate change will greatly impact water
quality. It will both increase pollutant loading to waters and make
existing pollution problems more acute. The U.S.  191

DEIS at 2-28.  DEIS at 2-31.  193 DEIS at 2-31.  194 See Fischenich,
J. Craig, Effects of Riprap on Riverine and Riparian Ecosystems,
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (April 2003), attached as Exhibit 79.
195 DEIS at 3.4-9.  192

Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has acknowledged that climate
change will cause several alarming threats to water quality such as
warming water temperatures that change contaminant concentrations
in water and alter aquatic system uses, new patterns of rainfall and
snowfall that alter water supply for drinking and other uses including
use by wildlife and lead to changes in pollution levels in aquatic
systems, and more intense storms that threaten water infrastructure
and increase polluted stormwater runoff.196 Specifically, EPA has
concluded that “[t]he number of waters recognized as ‘impaired’
is likely to increase, even if pollution levels are stable.”197 This
is largely because warmer temperatures will lead to warmer water,
which holds less oxygen, and can foster harmful algal blooms and
increase the toxicity of some pollutants.198 Similarly, EPA has found
that more extreme water-related events, such as increased and more
intense storms, will have negative water quality impacts by causing
more intense flooding and other events that result in high flows,
increased sediment and erosion, and a resulting increase in nutrients,
pathogens, and toxins entering waterbodies.199 Temperature increases
will also change aquatic biology, disrupting aquatic system health and
often resulting in the establishment of invasive and non-indigenous
species in certain waters at the expense of native species.200 As EPA
has determined, this alone may “result in significant deterioration
of aquatic ecosystem health in some areas.”201 Additionally, climate
change will change flow rates in streams and lakes, change the size
of streams and wetlands, and result in other disruptions relating to
the flow, quantity, and presence of water in many of our waters.202
The Keystone XL project will have multiple impacts to hundreds of
waterbodies, including certain waterbodies, like intermittent streams,
prairie pothole wetlands and Rainwater Basin wetlands, that are serious
risk of impacts from climate change. Many of the direct and indirect
impacts will occur over time. Additionally, many of the waterbodies
impacted are already impaired for the very type of pollutants (e.g.,
TSS and nutrients) that will increase in actual amount and/or polluting
effect as a result of climate change.203 In violation of NEPA, the DEIS
simply fails to analyze how impacts from the project will be compounded
by climate change. This failure means that many potential harms have
not been given a hard look.  The potential impacts not examined by the
DEIS are numerous. For instance, the pipeline will cause changes in
alteration of freeze-thaw timing due to increased water temperatures
associated with heat input from the pipeline.204 Freeze and thawing
cycles will also be impacted by climate change. Yet, the DEIS does
not analyze these freeze-thaw timing changes and consequent impacts
in light of that fact that they will compounded over time by 196

U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Water, National
Water Program Strategy: Response to Climate Change (hereinafter
“National Water Program Climate Strategy”), EPA 800-R-08-001
(September 2008) at ii, attached as Exhibit 80.  197 Id.  198 Id.
199 Id.  200 Id. at ii-iii.  201 Id. at iii.  202 Id. at ii.  203 DEIS
at tbls. 3.3.1.2-2 & 3.3.1.2-3.  204 DEIS at 3.4-9.  74

climate change. This failure overlooks some potentially enormous
impacts. For instance, it is clear that climate change will
facilitate the establishment of invasive species (see below),
which can be extremely opportunistic. By clearing ROWs for the
pipeline and accompanying infrastructure, opportunities may be
presented for invasives to be introduced from both construction and
operation activities. Warmer soil temperatures from the pipeline plus
warming weather could make conditions extremely favorable for certain
invasive species to establish themselves and out-compete or infect
native species.  Furthermore, impacts to some wetlands that will be
cleared of vegetation, partially or completely, such as forested and
scrub/shrub wetlands will regenerate slowly. Due to climate change,
forested or scrub/shrub areas may regenerate in a manner that favors
growth of very different species than previously existed in these
areas, potential dramatically altering the resource once it is
restored. The DEIS completely fails to account for the long-term
regeneration and restoration of these resources in light of climate
change.  The DEIS additionally states that there will be permanent
alteration in water-holding capacity due to alteration or breaching of
water-retaining substrates in the prairie pothole and Rainwater Basin
regions as a result of the project, but does not discuss impacts
that may arise from such alterations in light of climate change,
which will also affect water levels in these resources.205 Changes
in water holding capacity can severely impact the function of waters
such as depressional wetlands like prairie potholes or Rainwater Basin
wetlands. The amount of water in such wetlands, the length of time
water stays in these resources, and the depth of water dramatically
impact the resources use by wildlife. Wildlife, such as waterfowl,
depend on potholes and other depressional wetlands to have water at
certain times for breeding, foraging and migratory fly over.206 “The
Prairie Pothole Region is the most productive habitat for breeding
ducks in the world. It produces 50–80% of the continent’s ducks,
even though it represents only 10% of the continent’s total wetland
area.”207 Too much, or too little, water can greatly impact the
use of these resources to waterfowl and other wildlife. Climate
change promises to dramatically impact water level in depressional
wetlands in the Great Plains. Some shallow, temporary wetlands may
simply dry up. Deeper, more permanent wetlands may become shallow,
temporary wetlands due to climate change.208 The DEIS fails to analyze
how permanent alterations in water holding capacity of depressional
wetlands when compounded by water level changes brought about by
climate change will impact these resources and associated wildlife
This violates NEPA.  The DEIS also fails to properly analyze impacts to
floodplains. It states that, “Floodplain terraces and low floodplains
are found along the Project route. Two pump stations and 10 MLVs 205

DEIS at 3.4-9.  See, e.g., Johnson, W. Carter, et al., Prairie
Wetland Complexes as Landscape Functional Units in Changing Climate, 60
BioScience 128 (Feb. 2010), attached as Exhibit 81.  207 North American
Bird Conservation Initiative, The State of the Birds 2010 Report on
Climate Change, U.S. Dep’t of the Interior, at 26, available at,
http://www.stateofthebirds.org/pdf_files/State%20of%20the%20Birds_FINAL.pdf
(last visited June 29, 2010) and attached as Exhibit 82.  208 Id. at
17.  206

would be in the 100-year floodplain as currently proposed, but
the effect of those facilities on floodplain function is expected
to be minor.”209 As we have seen across the country, flooding
within the 100-year floodplains have become more significant and more
frequent. Also, flooding within the 500-year floodplain has also become
more frequent and severe.210 The DEIS limits its analysis of floodplain
impacts to current 100-year floodplains identified by Federal Emergency
Management Agencies mapping.211 FEMA’s mapping has been alleged to be
unreliable and inaccurate by members of Congress, and an investigation
by the General Accounting Office is underway.212. Moreover, the mapping
does not reflect changes in floodplains due to climate change, which
almost certainly will expand the number of areas that see frequent
flood events.  As such, the DEIS analysis of floodplain impacts fails
to consider the likely changes in flood patterns and in the present
and future extent of floodplains themselves.  The DEIS also makes
other assumptions regarding flooding that simply will not hold up
over time. For instance, the DEIS states that “The pipeline would
be constructed under river channels with potential for lateral
scour.”213 However, there is no indication that this includes
river channels that currently may not be at risk for lateral scour,
but will likely be at-risk for lateral scour as a result of increased
flood events due to climate change.  The project will additionally
have profound impacts to groundwater resources. The DEIS states that,
“Potential impacts to groundwater during construction activities of
the Project and its connected actions include: Groundwater quality
degradation during or after construction resulting from disposal of
materials and equipment; Temporary increases in local groundwater
levels due to infiltration of hydrostatic testing waters.”214
As with surface waters, changes in precipitation and snowmelt will
impacts groundwater quality as well as recharge rates.215 Mitigation
measures to compensate for these impacts described in the DEIS do not
take climate change impacts into account. As such, the DEIS fails to
adequately analyze and account for the likely impacts to groundwater
resources that will be caused by the project.

DEIS at 5-4.  See, e.g., U.S. Geological Survey,
Two 500-Year Floods Within 15 Years?, available at,
http://www.usgs.gov/corecast/details.asp?ep=50 (last visited,
June 14, 2010) and attached as Exhibit 83.  211 DEIS
at 3.3-20.  212 Press Release, At Schumer’s Urging,
Investigative Arm of Congress Initiates Investigation into
Flawed Flood Map Technology (June 29, 2009), available at,
http://schumer.senate.gov/new_website/record.cfm?id=315188 (last
visited June 29, 2010) and attached as Exhibit 84.  213 DEIS at
3.3-29.  214 DEIS at 5-4.  215 Bates, B.C., Z.W. Kundzewicz, S. Wu
and J.P. Palutikof, Eds., Climate Change and Water, Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change, at 102. Attached as Exhibit 85.  210

3.

The DEIS does not consider potential effects of project on mercury
levels in waters and acid rain in violation of NEPA

The project will result in increased refining of heavy crude
oil. Increased refining will cause more mercury and suspended solids
being released into the waters through air deposition, as well as
increased acid rain. Mercury and acid rain pose known threats to
aquatic species and water quality, including to aquatic wildlife that
is already struggling due to habitat change being caused by climate
change, massive disruptions of the food web from invasive species, and
the ongoing persistent effects and bio-accumulation of toxins such as
mercury and PCBs.216 Mercury is of chief concern. Mercury is a trace
component of all fossil fuels, including natural gas, gas condensates,
crude oil, coal, tar sands, and other bitumens. The use of fossil
hydrocarbons as fuels provides the main opportunity for releasing
emissions of the mercury they contain into the atmospheric environment,
but other avenues also exist in production, transportation, and
processing systems. These other avenues may cause mercury to be
released directly to air, water, or solid waste streams.217 Once in
the environment, mercury bioaccumulates in the food chain and can
poison particularly species at the top of the food chain like large
fish, birds, and people. Mercury is a particular health concern with
younger children and women.218 In violation of the NEPA, the DEIS
fails to adequately examine the impacts of mercury and acid rain.  4.

Mitigation measures are inadequate violating both NEPA and the CWA

Several of the listed mitigation measures fail to explain how they will
appropriately mitigate impacts, or whether practicable alternatives
exist that would result in less impacts to aquatic resources. This
violates NEPA by failing to properly account for the project’s
impacts and shows that the project will not meet CWA permitting
requirements. For example, the DEIS states that the use of herbicides
or pesticides will prohibited within 100 feet of any wetland,

See Epstein, Paul H. and Jesse Selber, Eds., Oil: A Life Cycle Analysis
of its Health and Environmental Impacts, The Center for Health and
the Global Environment, Harvard Medical School (2000), available at,
http://chge.med.harvard.edu/publications/documents/oilreportex.pdf
(last visited June 29, 2010) and attached as Exhibit 85A;
Environmental Protection Agency, What is Acid Rain (2007), available
at, http://www.epa.gov/acidrain/what/index.html (last visited June 29,
2010) and attached as Exhibit 86.  217 See Wilhelm, S. Mark, Mercury
in Petroleum and Natural Gas: Estimation of Emissions from Production,
Process, and Combustion, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (2001) at
ii, available at, http://www.epa.gov/nrmrl/pubs/600r01066/600r01066.htm
(last visited June 29, 2010) and attached as Exhibit
87; Jones, Nicola, Tar Sands Mining Linked to Stream
Pollution, Scientific American (2009), available at, take:
http://www.scientificamerican.com/article.cfm?id=tar-sands-mining-linked-to-pollution
(last visited June 29, 2010) and attached as Exhibit 88.  218 See,
e.g, Environmental Protection Agency, Mercury Study Report to Congress
(1997), available at, http://www.epa.gov/hg/report.htm (last visited
June 29, 2010) and attached as Exhibit 89.  77

unless allowed by the appropriate land management or state agency.219
Foremost, this requirement is not even mitigation: it allows
herbicide and pesticide use where it currently would be allowed and
appears to add no additional requirement. Beyond that, there is no
explanation as to whether 100 feet will properly reduce impacts or
how that number was chosen. It appears to be a completely arbitrary
number. This similarly applies to a variety of other non-mandatory
mitigation measures that use 100 feet as the suggested distance for
activities (e.g., “Avoid parking equipment maintenance and repairs
in upland locations at least 100 feet from waterbodies and wetlands,
if possible;” “Perform all equipment maintenance and repairs in
upland locations at least 100 feet from waterbodies and wetlands, if
possible;”220 Hydrostatic test manifolds would be located more than
100 feet away from wetlands and riparian areas to the maximum extent
possible)221 Similarly, there is no explanation as to why the 85-foot
wide corridor construction zone mitigation measure is either protective
or the least damaging width practicable.222 Nor is there any guidance
about what sort of “soil conditions” would permit TransCanada to
ignore this width requirement and impact a wider corridor. This makes
it impossible assess whether these protective measures will actually
be used, and, if so, to what extent and to what effect.  5.

In violation of NEPA, the DEIS does not properly account for the fact
that many impacted wetlands and water bodies are not being regulated
under CWA by the Corps and therefore may not receive mitigation
for impacts

The DEIS relies on CWA protections to conclude that mitigation measures
will protect waters from the impacts of the pipeline. However,
due to two Supreme Court decisions, Solid Waste Agency of Northern
Cook County v. U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, 531 U.S. 159 (2001)
and Rapanos v. United States, 547 U.S. 715 (2006) and subsequent
Corps and EPA guidance documents interpreting those decisions,223
the status of CWA protections for many important waters that will
impacted by the project, such as intermittent streams and so-called
“isolated” wetlands, is in doubt.  224

MT

The overwhelming majority of streams impacted are intermittent or
ephemeral (350 in ; 331 in SD225; 127 in NE226; 273 in OK227; 415 in
TX228). In terms of the wetlands, the

DEIS at 5-9.  DEIS at 5-8.  221 DEIS at 5-6.  222 DEIS at 5-7.
223 See U. S. Environmental Protection Agency and U.S. Army
Corps of Engineers, Clean Water Act Jurisdiction Following
the U.S. Supreme Court’s Decision in Rapanos v. United
States & Carabell v. United States (June 5, 2007) available at
http://www.epa.gov/owow/wetlands/pdf/RapanosGuidance6507.pdf (last
visited June 29, 2010), noticed at 72 Fed. Reg. 31,824 (June 8, 2007)
(revised Dec. 2, 2008) and attached as Exhibit 90; Joint Memorandum on
SWANCC Decision, 68 Fed. Reg. 1991, 1995 (Jan, 15, 2003).  224 DEIS at
3.3-11.  225 DEIS at 3.3-13.  226 DEIS at 3.3-14.  227 DEIS at 3.3-16.
228 DEIS at 3.3-17.  220

pipeline crosses the interior of the country, where a great number
of depressional, geographically isolated wetlands exist. While the
DEIS never quantifies the number of “isolated” waters that will be
impacted, the DEIS acknowledges that “[w]etlands throughout Montana,
South Dakota, Nebraska, Kansas, Oklahoma, and Texas include isolated
depressional wetlands, glaciated kettlehole wetlands, and sinkhole
wetlands, as well as isolated floodplain wetlands such as oxbows.”229
Due to a 2003 guidance document interpreting the SWANCC decision,230
the Corps is not protecting geographically isolated wetlands such as
prairie potholes under the CWA meaning that developers have been free
to impact and destroy these valuable resources without any federal
safeguards under the CWA.231 Yet, the DEIS never examines the extent
to which jurisdictional uncertainty and Corps implementation of the
SWANCC and Rapanos decisions affects its conclusions regarding impacts
to water resources. While acknowledging that “[w]etland impacts that
affect non-jurisdictional wetlands under Section 404 would not require
mitigation,”232 the DEIS never even roughly quantifies these impacts
and does not discuss possible impacts to streams due to possible
questions of CWA jurisdiction. Instead, the DEIS relies heavily on
the existence of CWA protections to conclude impacts will be accounted
for when this may not be the case. For instance, the DEIS states that
[w]here the HDD method is not used for major waterbody crossings or
for waterbody crossings where important fisheries resources could
be impacted, Keystone would develop a site-specific plan addressing
proposed additional construction and mitigation procedures. Prior
to commencing any stream crossing construction activities, Keystone
would obtain a permit under Section 404 of the Clean Water Act (CWA)
through the USACE and Section 401 water quality certification as per
state regulations. If required, Keystone would work with the applicable
permitting agency to develop specific crossing and sediment handling
procedures for contaminated or impaired waters. Keystone would 229

DEIS at 3.4-1.  Joint Memorandum on SWANCC Decision, 68 Fed. Reg. 1991,
1995 (Jan, 15, 2003).  231 Some of the groups commenting on this
letter (National Wildlife Federation, Sierra Club, Natural Resources
Defense Council) have examined hundreds of Corps CWA jurisdictional
determination throughout the Great Plains and have not found a single
instance of a geographically isolated depressional wetlands being
determined jurisdictional under the Act since the SWANCC decision. This
is consistent with Congressional testimony provided by former
EPA Ass’t Administrator for Water Ben Grumbles’ testimony that
so-called isolated waters are no longer being protected. See Testimony
of Benjamin H. Grumbles, EPA Assistant Administrator for Water,
Hearing of House Transportation & Infrastructure Committee: “The 35th
Anniversary of the Clean Water Act: Successes and Future Challenges”
(Oct. 18, 2007), attached as Exhibit 90A (“[T]here are two guidances
that we are working under, the 2003 SWANCC guidance – and the basic
point there is in the guidance we held open the possibility that there
could be circumstances under . . . our regulations where there could be
an assertion of jurisdiction over isolated intrastate non-navigable
waters without relying on the migratory bird rule provisions. As
a legal matter, that is still possible, but as a practical matter,
we had not asserted jurisdiction over those types of wetlands based
on that guidance, which is still in place.”).  232 DEIS at 3.4-4 230

develop specific construction and crossing methods for
sensitive/protected waterbodies in conjunction with USACE and U.S. Fish
and Wildlife Service (USFWS) consultation.  Keystone would develop
a frac-out plan in consultation with the regulatory agencies for HDD
crossings.”233 The DEIS fails to mention the possibility that in many
instances both Section 404 and 401 safeguards would not be invoked.
The DEIS further states that: [a] total of 341 perennial waterbodies
would be crossed during the construction of the proposed Project. One
of four techniques would be used to cross perennial waterbodies: the
open-cut wet method, the dry flume method, the dry dam-and-pump method,
or, HDD, as described below. For each perennial waterbody crossing,
a site specific engineering and geomorphologic analysis would determine
the best method to use to avoid and reduce aquatic impacts. The actual
crossing method employed at an individual perennial stream would depend
on permit conditions from USACE and other relevant regulatory agencies,
as well as additional conditions that may be imposed by landowners or
land managers at the crossing location.234 Case law has called into
question jurisdiction for even perennial streams.235 This fact is
not acknowledged or accounted for by the DEIS. For the hundreds of
intermittent and ephemeral streams the Corps may determine are not
jurisdictional, similar protections may also not be applied. Yet,
the DEIS seems oblivious to this risk, stating that, “Prior to
any stream crossing construction activities, Keystone would obtain a
permit under Section 404 [of the CWA] through the USACE and Section
401 water quality certification as per state regulations.”236 DOS
is in no position to require such permits to be issued and it is
ultimate the Corps and EPA, or a court, that will determine whether
or not certain crossings require permits. While commenters believe
such waters deem protection, DOS is in no position to assume that
stream crossing will necessarily be subject to CWA protections. To
comply with NEPA, the DEIS must take this serious risk to waters
into account, and cannot rely on assumptions about CWA protections
ameliorating water impacts without assessing the extent to which
those protections are assured.  6.

The DEIS violates NEPA by failing to assess impacts to wetlands and
water resources from pump stations, mainline valves, roads and other
associated developments

The project will impact, in addition to the pipeline route,
wetlands and water resources associated with 30 new pump stations,
74 intermediate mainline valves or which 24 are check valves located
downstream of major river crossings, approximately 50 new access
roads and approximately 400 temporary access roads.237 However, the
DEIS did not assess the associated developments: “The Project would
disturb a total of 554 acres of wetlands (not including pipe 233

DEIS at 5-5.  DEIS at 2-27.  235 See United States v. Robison, 505 F.3d
1208 (11th Cir. 2007) (finding that government needed to demonstrate
“significant nexus” between perennial stream and downstream
navigable waters to establish CWA jurisdiction).  236 DEIS at 5-5.
237 DEIS at 2-2.  234

storage yards, rail sidings, contractor’s yards, access roads,
or construction camps).”238 These impacts could potentially be
enormous, as roads, storage yards and similar developments can disturb
or destroy water resources by directly impacting them by crossing
through them, or by causing stormwater discharges, erosion, changes in
water temperature by removing shading vegetation, and other similar
impacts. These impacts are not quantified or analyzed in a manner
that could be characterized as a “hard look.” The DEIS hints at
the scale of the potential impacts it fails to examine, acknowledging
that “[e]xtra workspace areas away from the construction ROW would
be required during construction of the Project for use as pipe storage
sites, railroad sidings and contractor yards.  Pipe storage sites
would be required at 30-mile to 80-mile intervals and contractor
yards would be required at approximately 60-mile intervals. It is
estimated that 40 pipe storage yards and 19 contractor yards would
be required for the proposed Project.”239 Additionally, extension
road construction would large in scale as well: “Construction of
some temporary roads would be required in addition to upgrading of
existing roads. Approximately 400 temporary access roads are needed to
provide adequate access to the construction sites. Private roads and
any new temporary access roads would be used and maintained only with
permission of the landowner or land management agency. Some short,
permanent access roads from public roads to the proposed tank farm,
pump stations, delivery facilities, and intermediate MLVs would
also be necessary.  Approximately 50 permanent access roads would be
needed. Prior to construction, the location of new permanent access
roads would be finalized.” These roads must be relatively wide,
as “access road temporary and permanent disturbance estimates
are based on 30-foot roadway width required to accommodate oversized
vehicles. All non-public roads are conservatively estimated to require
upgrades and maintenance during construction.”240 However, the
impacts of building 40 pipe storage yards, 19 contractor yards, 400
temporary access roads, and 50 permanent roads on wetlands, streams,
rivers and other waters are not analyzed. This is a blatant oversight
in violation of NEPA.  7.

The DEIS violates NEPA by failing to adequately analyze the impacts
of refineries

The DEIS summarily dismisses potential impacts of refinery expansion
to water quality by asserting that new refineries or other existing
refineries that propose upgrades would be required to satisfy
NPDES discharge requirements and thus would avoid significant
impacts to water quality.241 This is an inadequate analysis of the
potential impacts to water quality and aquatic ecosystems. Increased
transportation of crude of from Canadian tar sands for refining in
the United States can be expected to increase water pollution from US
refineries.242 An agency cannot ignore the environmental impacts of
a project on the expectation that other federal agencies will address
them.243 Additionally, the DEIS again does not account for what types
of 238

DEIS at ES-11 (emphasis added).  DEIS at 2-12.  240 DEIS at 2-16.
241 DEIS at 3.14-36.  242 See Declaration of Galen Hartman, attached
as Exhibit 91.  243 See Illinois Commerce Comm'n v. Interstate Commerce
Comm’n, 848 F.2d 1246, 1259 (D.C.  Cir. 1988) (noting that an agency
“may not delegate to parties and intervenors it own 239

waters are being discharged into and whether these waters will
continued to be protected by federal and state agencies responsible for
implementing the NPDES program. As a result of the SWANCC and Rapanos
decisions, certain major polluting facilities have made arguments they
no longer need NPDES permits for their discharges.244 This oversight
violates NEPA.  8.

The DEIS provides inadequate analysis of releases of drilling fluid
and drilling fluid additives in violation of NEPA

Drilling fluid, consisting primarily of bentonite, is used with the HDD
and guided bore crossing technique. Additives are often used to improve
the likelihood of a successful bore (obtaining a better seal, and
avoiding some frac-outs), but they can have other effects as well. In
other words, additives should be regarded as part of the mitigation
approach and carefully examined. The DEIS states that mitigating
measures may be needed in the instances of a fracout when HDD is used,
but does not discuss additives and their possible impacts.  This topic
is important and is not adequately addressed in the DEIS. It should
have been more thoroughly covered as previous completed projects,
such as the MinnCan project, saw large releases of drilling mud that
impacted several streams.245 The DEIS fails to describe additives to
drilling mud or their possible impacts. The large amounts of drilling
mud released on the MinnCan project likely meant that concentrations
in the water column were high. Drilling fluids may enter wetlands
as well. Large amounts of fluids entered the surface and subsurface
of wetlands on the MinnCan project, including, for example, releases
into the Hay Creek wetland which caused a dome to develop within the
wetlands. This is essentially fill into the wetland of bentonite and
additives, which could cause long term impacts and chemical changes
in wetland soils, and permanent destructive changes to native plant
communities in those wetlands. The pipeline will cross and will
disturb a number of outstanding resource value rivers, streams and
wetlands. To comply with NEPA, a thorough analysis of the risks and
possible impacts associated with drilling fluid needs to occur.  9.

The DEIS provides inadequate analysis of impacts to groundwater and
surface water from an oil spill or leak in violation of NEPA

The Keystone XL pipeline will pass through areas where groundwater
is close to the surface and where rural populations rely entirely on
groundwater for domestic and agricultural

responsibility to independently investigate and assess the
environmental impact of the proposal before it.”).  244 See
Earthjustice, Env’t Am., Clean Water Action Network, Nat’l
Wildlife Federation, Natural Res. Def. Council, Sierra Club, and
S. Envtl. Law Ctr., Courting Disaster: How the Supreme Court Has Broken
the Clean Water Act and Why Congress Must Fix It (2009), available at,
http://www.nwf.org/News-and-Magazines/MediaCenter/Reports/Archive/2009/~/media/PDFs/Water/200904_CourtingDisaster_Report.ashx
(last visited June 29, 2010), and attached as Exhibit 92.  245 See
enclosed Powerpoint presentation, titled “Potential Impacts of
Large-Diameter Pipelines to Wetlands” and other DNR comments,
attached as Exhibit 93.  82

water supply.246 Some of the major aquifers that the Keystone XL
pipeline will pass over include the Northern Great Plains Aquifer
System; the troubled Ogallala Aquifer which extends throughout a
significant portion of the Great Plains and is a critical source
of water supply for that area; the Trinity Aquifer; Texas Coastal
Uplands Aquifer; and Texas Coastal Lowlands Aquifer.247 Many of these
aquifers are close to surface or are overlain by karst formations
or soils permeable to oil.  Among the many substances in crude-oil
are chemicals such as benzene, toluene, ethylbenzene, xylene and
other lightweight chemical compounds. These compounds are more water
soluble and can disperse further and more rapidly in both surface
and ground waters than other crude oil substances. The record for
pipeline safety is troubling. The DEIS shows that on average, there
have been 5 “serious” spills nationwide from hazardous liquid
pipeline systems.248 The number of “significant” spills is
even greater at 143 per year over the last 20 years, with a gross
loss of 137,821 barrels spilled and less than half that amount
being “recovered.”249 The causes of these spills are myriad:
corrosion, human error, excavation damage natural force damage and
other causes.250 Given that the DEIS projects that between .81 and
3.86 spills or leaks spilling between 18,000 and 60,000 gallons per
year are likely to occur,251 these compounds pose a serious threat to
water quality. A significant spill could migrate into the groundwater
and impact drinking water and irrigation water supplies.252 Moreover,
the DEIS’s conclusion that “large to very large spills would
be unlikely to occur” needs to be re-evaluated in light of the
painful on-going lesson in the Gulf of Mexico where promises about
the safety of oil technology have rung tragically hollow.  The DEIS
acknowledges that impacts to waters – both surface and ground –
from spills may occur. The DEIS states that “[a] large spill could
affect drinking water sources and irrigation water supplies.”253 The
DEIS also concedes that “[s]ubstantial spills of refined products,
especially diesel and substantial to very large spills of crude oil may
reach groundwater where the overlying soils are porous and not water
saturated, and the water table is relatively near the surface.”254
In a curt analysis, the DEIS on the one hand concludes that “it is
not anticipated that groundwater quality would be affected by disposal
activities, spills or leaks during construction activities,” but on
the other hand concedes that “shallow or near-surface aquifers are
… present beneath the proposed [pipeline] route.”255 Similarly,
the DEIS notes that 246

See Bartolino, J.R. and W.L. Cunningham, Ground-water Depletion
Across the Nation, United States Geological Survey (2003), available
at http://pubs.usgs.gov/fs/fs-103-03/ (last visited June 29, 2010)
and attached as Exhibit 94.  247 See generally DEIS, Water Resources,
§ 3.3.1.1 (Groundwater, describing groundwater resources impacted by
the project).  248 DEIS at tbl. 3.13.2-1.  249 DEIS at tbl. 3.13.2-2.
250 DEIS at tbl. 3.13.2-3.  251 DEIS at tbl. 3.13.3-1, 252 DEIS at
3.13-40 – 42.  253 DEIS at 3.13-41.  254 DEIS at 3.13-42.  255 DEIS
at 3.13-42.  83

“[routine operation and maintenance is not expected to affect
groundwater resources; however, if a crude oil release occurred, crude
oil could migrate into subsurface aquifers and into areas where these
aquifers are used for water supplies.”256 Despite these brushed
aside major risks, the DOS’s conclusion that there is little cause
for worry is based on its belief that “Keystone’s ERP” would
handle any potential event.257 This faith is misplaced and overlays
a failure to adequately detail which aquifers and surface water areas
are at risk. A spill over just one of the resources placed at risk –
for instance, the Ogallala Aquifer – could prove catastrophic. The
proposed pipeline would bring crude through fragile sand hills over
the Ogallala Aquifer. The soil in this area is extremely porous and
any leaks would be quickly absorbed like a sponge, contaminating the
drinking water and agricultural irrigation waters potentially as widely
as from South Dakota to Texas. The aquifer is already imperiled by
being overused and many researchers are concerned it will dry up in
coming decades, threatening drinking supplies for many states258. The
toxics spilling from a tar sands pipeline could be devastating. The
DEIS also does not analyze how geology, vegetation, soil composition
and land use could impact how oil would be dispersed into and through
surface or groundwater or identify areas with characteristics that
put them at greater risk. Again, given the likelihood of a significant
oil spill, this treatment of the potentially catastrophic impacts of
the pipeline on water resources is inadequate.  Moreover, the DEIS
does not investigate or explain the placement of shut-off valves
or other possible mechanisms that could be used to avoid harmful
consequences to sensitive natural resources. As discussed earlier,
the pipelines cross numerous sensitive streams and wetlands.  Yet,
shut-off valves will only be placed on large perennial streams259 with
no explanation as to why other significant streams and wetlands will
not have shut-off valves, given both the value of these resources
and the fact that an intermittent stream during times of flow has
as much potential to rapidly carry spilled oil downstream as does a
perennial stream. The DEIS should explore and explain the availability
or shut-off valves or other mechanisms to protect sensitive resources
from the effects of spills and leaks.

DEIS at 3.13-42.  DEIS at 3.13-42.  258 See US
Geological Survey, Groundwater Depletion, available at,
http://ga.water.usgs.gov/edu/gwdepletion.html (last visited June 25,
2010), attached as Exhibit 94A (finding that “water levels [in the
Ogallala aquifer] have declined more than 100 feet in some areas and
the saturated thickness has been reduced by more than half in others”
and that overdrawing groundwater can result in wells running dry);
Guru, Manjula V., and James E.  Horne, The Ogallala Aquifer, The Kerr
Center for the Sustainable Agriculture (2000), at 7-8, available
at http://www.kerrcenter.com/publications/ogallala_aquifer.pdf
and attached as Exhibit 94B (“[F]or thirty years the High Plains
irrigators have been consuming aquifer water at a rate conservatively
estimated to be ten times the rate of natural recharge.”).  259 DEIS
at 3.13-41.  257

E.

The DEIS does not properly address the wildlife impacts of the Project.
1.

The DEIS fails to adequately analyze wildlife impacts from pipeline
construction and operation

Impacts to wildlife are not properly analyzed under NEPA, and DOS
also appears to be in violation of the Endangered Species Act for
not properly consulting on the impacts of the pipeline to threatened
and endangered species. The project will result in immense impacts
along the project route due largely to habitat loss, modification,
and fragmentation. Construction of the proposed Project would result
in loss and alteration of about 22,493 acres of wildlife habitat,
including 11,533 acres of grasslands and rangelands, 2,523 acres of
forested habitat, and 554 acres of wetland habitats (including 271
acres of forested wetlands).”260 This loss and fragmentation has
the potential to be especially harmful in areas, such as forests and
shrub-land, that will recover over a longer period time.  The impacts
of habitat fragmentation are documented and well-known. Studies have
shown that the fragmentation of a species’ habitat can threaten that
species survival for a variety of reasons. These include: reduction of
total habitat area; vulnerability during dispersal to other patches
of habitat (increased risk of predation to species during movement);
isolation of a species population; edge effects (e.g., more “edge”
habitat that changes the type and distribution of species); changes
in microclimate (e.g., forested areas tend to be shadier, more humid
and less windy, but more edge can alter these micro climates).261 The
DEIS acknowledges these impacts of habitat fragmentation, stating that
predator movement will be facilitated by the existence of a right of
way (ROW) for the pipeline; predator opportunities will be increased
by fragmentation as more “edge” habitat is created for predation
and parasitism (like cowbird nesting invasions); and fragmentation
will impact movement of amphibians, reptiles, small mammals and
some bird species, but fails to properly analyze their impacts on
species.262 Primarily, a glaring omission in DOS’s analysis is that
none of these wildlife impacts are assessed in terms of how they will
be amplified by climate change. Adaptation to climate change will be
key to the survival of species and ecosystems. Adaption will require
migration of species and habitat areas. However, land use changes,
such as fragmentation, will place

DEIS at ES-12.  See Towson University,
What is Habitat Fragmentation, available at,
http://chesapeake.towson.edu/landscape/forestfrag/all_habitatfrag.asp
(last visited June 8, 2010) and attached as Exhibit 95. Johnson,
Douglas H., Habitat Fragmentation Effects on Birds in
Grasslands and Wetlands: A Critique of Our Knowledge, USGS,
Northern Plains Wildlife Research Center, (2001), available
at, http://www.npwrc.usgs.gov/resource/birds/habfrag/index.htm
(last visited June 8, 2010) and attached as Exhibit 96 (“Habitat
fragmentation exacerbates the problem of habitat loss for grassland
and wetland birds. Remaining patches of grasslands and wetlands may
be too small, too isolated, and too influenced by edge effects to
maintain viable populations of some breeding birds.”) 262 E.g. DEIS
at 3.6-21 – 22.  261

additional hurdles to such migration, making a dire situation even
bleaker.263 Studies have concluded that, “Genetic constraints upon
adaptation, together with land cover changes that impede gene flow, are
likely to reduce the rate of adaptation well below the unusually rapid
pace of expected future climate change.”264 Reducing non-climate
change related stressors, like habitat fragmentation, will be key to
the ability of species to successfully adapt to climate change. In
its draft 5-year Action Plan for Responding to Accelerating Climate
Change, the US Fish and Wildlife Service has made it an objective
to reduce non-climate change ecosystem stressors.265 Chief among
these stressors that should be reduced are “changes in land-use
(e.g., agricultural conversion, energy development, urbanization,
transportation); habitat fragmentation; invasive species; unnatural
wildfire; pollution; contaminants; and other disturbances.”266 Much
of the habitat fragmentation associated with the project and associated
or similar projects will remain permanent, creating potentially
permanent barriers to some species’ migration and/or making such
migration more difficult by, for instance, introducing areas where
predation is likely to occur. In violation of NEPA, the DEIS does
not examine the impacts of this habitat fragmentation, destruction
and disturbance in the context of future species movement driven by
the need to adapt to climate change. It must do so.  The DEIS further
fails to analyze the impacts to wildlife in terms of effects on water
supply from the project compounded by climate change. For instance,
the DEIS does not analyze the affect that changes in wetlands water
levels caused by the project will have on waterfowl and other migratory
bird breeding in light of the fact that climate change will also
modify these water levels. These compounded impacts could potentially
eliminate countless acres of prime waterfowl production areas like the
Prairie Pothole and Rainwater Basin wetlands.267 The DEIS also relies
on “restoration” efforts to conclude that activities will not
result in major impacts to wildlife268. The analysis is deficient,
however, because the DEIS fails to give information regarding the
details of such restoration efforts or the timeframes in which they
will occur. The DEIS further fails to take into account how climate
change will impact those restoration efforts. For instance, can it
reasonably be expected that restoration efforts – particularly
of forested and shrub-land that will require considerable time to
regenerate – will result in habitat similar to that which was
destroyed by the pipeline’s construction? Given 263

See Opdam, Paul and Dirk Wascher, Climate change meets habitat
fragmentation: linking landscape and biogeogrpahical scale levels
in research and conservation, 117 Biological Conservation 285-297
(2004), attached as Exhibit 97.  264 Davis, Margaret B. and Ruth
G. Shaw, Range Shifts and Adaptive Responses to Quarternary Climate
Change, 292 Science 673 (Apr. 2001), attached as Exhibit 98.  265 See
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Draft Appendix: 5-Year Action Plan
for Implementing the Climate Change Strategic Plan (2009) at 11,
attached as Exhibit 99.  266 Id.(emphasis added).  267 See Johnson
et al., supra.  268 DEIS at ES-12.  86

predicted changes in temperature, precipitation patterns, snowmelt,
and other factors, the likely answer to this question is that
forest and other habitats that require long-term regeneration will
regenerate to produce dramatically different habitat.269 This is not
accounted for at all by the DEIS.  Furthermore, the DEIS does not
quantify the impacts of direct disturbance that will be mitigated,
and admits that mitigation measures may themselves cause harm to
species by means such as introduction of invasives. For example,
the DEIS states that disturbances from temporary roads and camps
would “generally be restored and revegetated, ”270 but does not
state that they will always be restored or revegetated, or discuss how
often they will be restored or revegetated. The DEIS also states that
seed grasses used to revegetate areas may actually introduce invasive
species. As detailed below, invasive species are an enormous threat
to ecosystems and native species – especially in light of climate
change. While the DEIS states that disturbed native range should be
reseeded with native seed mixes after topsoil replacement,271 there is
no discussion in the DEIS as why restoration planting efforts would
not be completely native species. It is critical that restoration
efforts themselves not introduce invasive species.  The DEIS fails
to discuss the amount of mitigation for impacts from temporary
roads or camps that will actually take place or in any way quantify
or analyze the introduction of invasive species or other impacts
that may result from those mitigation measures.  The introduction
of invasive species is also improperly analyzed. The pipeline ROW
will cut through native grassland, shrub, and forest communities
and would remove vegetation including sagebrush and native grasses,
creating an unvegetated strip over the pipeline trench and adjacent
construction areas. Subsequent revegetation may not provide habitat
features comparable to pre-project conditions. The DEIS acknowledges
that: “After removal of vegetation cover and disturbance to the soil,
reestablishment of vegetation communities could be delayed or prevented
by infestations of noxious weeds and invasive plants. Vegetation
removal and soil disturbance during construction could create optimal
conditions for the establishment of many weeds.”272

See Shugart Herman, et al., Forests and Global Climate Change,
Pew Center on Global Climate Change (2003) at iv, available
at, http://www.pewclimate.org/docUploads/forestry.pdf (last
visited June 29, 2010) and attached as Exhibit 100; Joyce,
Linda A., et al., Management for Adaptation, ADAPTATION OF
FORESTS AND PEOPLE TO CLIMATE CHANGE (2009) at 139, available
at http://www.fs.fed.us/rm/pubs_other/rmrs_2009_innes_j001.pdf
(last visited June 29, 2010) and attached as Exhibit 101;
Blate, G.M., et al., Adapting to climate change in United
States national forests, 60 Unasylva (2009) at 58, available at,
http://www.fs.fed.us/rm/pubs_other/rmrs_2009_blate_g001.pdf (last
visited June 29, 2010), and attached as Exhibit 102.  270 DEIS
at 3.6-14.  271 DEIS at 5-13.  272 DEIS at ES-11 – 12.  87

Because many invasive species are fast-growing, highly opportunistic
ecological generalists, land use change and alteration generally
favors biological invasion.273 Introduction of non-native aquatic
species can compete with native species and transmit diseases.274
As protection against invasives, the DEIS provides that, “During
construction, the Contractor shall clean the tracks, tires, and
blades of equipment by hand (track shovel) or compressed air to
remove excess soil prior to movement of equipment out of weed or
soil-borne pest infested areas or utilize cleaning stations to remove
vegetative materials using water under high pressure.”275 This
is insufficient to protect sensitive ecosystems from the spread of
invasive species. Small organisms may be hidden in crevices and other
dangers, such as disease-spreading parasites, bacteria and viruses,
are completely invisible to the naked eye. Additionally, the DEIS only
states that such cleaning/decontamination will occur “before entering
areas either identified as sensitive habitats or new ROW.”276 The
DEIS does not explain why such measures would not be used in existing
right of ways, construction areas, or other locations where invasives
could easily be introduced, become established and negatively impact
native species.  Plans for preventing the spread of invasive species
from hydrostatic testing equipment are also inadequate, and the DEIS
fails to account for these shortcomings. Measures apply only in areas
“where zebra mussels are known to occur” and the measures only
call for a “thorough cleaning” of equipment.277 The project will
apparently not take preventive measures to stop invasives spreading
where zebra mussels are not present. This is a wholly unacceptable
risk that must be examined. Also, as stated above, a “thorough
cleaning” may not remove all invasives that could be contained in
equipment and subsequently spread to other waterbodies. The utmost
precaution should be taken in preventing the spread of invasive
species, since they are a pollutant that spreads exponentially over
time, and once established, are nearly impossible to eradicate and
incredibly costly to manage. Climate change will make it ever the
easier for such invasives to spread, and harder to control such
invasives. These impacts are not examined by the DEIS and must be
given a hard look.  The DEIS also indicates that impacts it concludes
will be mitigated may, in fact, not be mitigated for, making those
conclusions faulty. For instance, in regards to impacts from electrical
distribution or transmission lines, the DEIS states that “[p]otential
impacts to wildlife from connected actions are direct mortality due
to collision with or electrocution by electrical distribution and
transmission lines, and reduced survival and reproduction for ground
nesting birds due to the creation of perches for raptors in grassland
and shrub land habitats. To reduce these impacts, power providers may
incorporate standard, safe designs, as outlined in Suggested Practice
for Avian Protection on Power Lines (issued by the Avian Power Line
Interaction Committee [APLIC] in 2006) into the design of electrical
distribution lines in areas of identified

See Comm’n for Envtl. Cooperation, North American Mosaic: An
Overview of Key Environmental Issues, at 4, attached as Exhibit 103.
274 DEIS at 5-14.  275 DEIS at App. B-14; Detail Drawings 30, 31.
276 DEIS at 3.6-24.  277 DEIS at App. B-64 – 65.  88

avian concern.”278 The use of the permissive word “may,” as
opposed to must or shall, means that these measures may not be taken
in all – or any – instances.  The DEIS additionally fails to
properly detail the impacts to wildlife caused by the construction of
the pipeline. Many potentially harmful activities will be associated
with the construction of the pipeline. For instance, the DEIS does
not address this construction in detail or provide mitigation measures
for the construction of some temporary roads that would be required in
addition to upgrading of existing roads. Approximately 400 temporary
access roads are needed to provide adequate access to the construction
sites.279 The DEIS does not address impacts from driving fuel trucks
– such as collisions – which would be transported daily by fuel
trucks from the yards to the construction area for equipment fueling
or the impact of building “temporary bridges (e.g., subsoil fill
over culverts, timber mats supported by flumes, railcar flatbeds,
flexifloat apparatus)” which “would be installed across all
perennial water bodies to allow construction equipment to cross with
reduced disturbance.”280 In addition, the methods proposed in the
DEIS for water body and wetland crossings are unnecessarily destructive
in many instances, and these impacts are not properly analyzed or
compared to less destructive potential alternatives. Approximately 621
intermittent waterbodies would be crossed by the proposed Project.281
In the event that these intermittent waterbodies are dry or stagnant
at the time of crossing, conventional upland cross-country construction
techniques would be used. However, the pipeline would be installed with
the open-cut wet crossing method if water is flowing at the time of
installation.282 The open-cut wet crossing method is potentially more
harmful to wildlife and wildlife habitat than other methods by causing
the discharge of suspended solids and other pollutants into waters,
many of which are already impaired. There is inadequate explanation as
to both the number of waters that might be impacted by this method,
or why efforts are not made to ensure crossings at times when a less
harmful method can be used.  2.

The DEIS fails to adequately analyze the Project’s indirect and
cumulative impacts on wildlife (including transboundary impacts)

The EIS must “provide full and fair discussion of significant
environmental impacts and shall inform decision-makers and the public
of the reasonable alternatives which would avoid or minimize adverse
impacts or enhance the quality of the human environment.”283 In
addition to the direct effects of the proposed project, this discussion
must include analysis of “indirect effects which . . . are later
in time or farther removed in distance, but are still reasonably
foreseeable.”284 An EIS must also consider the cumulative impacts
of the proposed federal agency action together with past, present
and reasonably foreseeable future actions, including all 278

DEIS at ES-12.  DEIS at 2-16.  280 DEIS at 2-30.  281 DEIS at App. E.
282 DEIS at 2-30.  283 40 C.F.R. § 1502.1.  284 40 C.F.R. § 1508.8.

federal and non-federal activities.285 Courts have routinely held that
agencies may not break a project or activity into components in order
to avoid the full range of environmental analysis and that cumulative
impacts analysis is necessary for all reasonably foreseeable results
of the action under consideration.286 The DEIS must also consider
transboundary impacts. In this case, the DEIS must consider the
extensive impacts in Canada from the tar sands development spurred
by this and similar pipeline projects that provide a market for this
dirty fuel. Under NEPA’s obligation to provide “full and fair
discussion of significant environmental impacts,” the DOS must
consider the full extent of reasonably foreseeable direct, indirect,
and cumulative environmental impacts both within the United States and
in Canada. The Council on Environmental Quality (CEQ) addresses this
issue in its Guidance on NEPA Analyses for Transboundary Impacts.287
The CEQ guidance clarifies that “NEPA law directs federal agencies
to analyze the effects of proposed actions to the extent they
are reasonably foreseeable consequences of the proposed action,
regardless of where those impacts might occur.”288 CEQ concludes
that “agencies must include analysis of reasonably foreseeable
transboundary effects of proposed actions in their analysis of
proposed actions in the United States.”289 Thus, the CEQ guidance
unambiguously conveys the necessity of considering impacts on the
environment within the U.S. and beyond its borders. The United States
District Court for the District of Columbia recently cited the CEQ
guidance document when it expressly rejected agency arguments that the
NEPA “hard look” obligation stops at the border. In Government of
the Province of Manitoba v. Salazar, No.02-2057, 2010 U.S. Dist. WL
744713 (D.D.C. June 7, 2010), which concerned a dispute over a federal
project designed to withdraw water from Lake Sakakawea and transfer
it via pipeline for use in Minot and other areas of North Dakota,
the Court ruled that the Bureau of Reclamation must consider “(1)
the cumulative impacts of water withdrawal on the water levels of
Lake Sakakawea and the Missouri River, and (2) the consequences
of biota transfer into the Hudson Bay Basin, including Canada.”
Id. at *1 (emphasis added).  The Keystone XL DEIS fails to properly
analyze the reasonably foreseeable consequences of permitting the
pipeline in Canada, primarily the impacts associated with tar sands
mining including extensive water withdrawals and tailings ponds and
the resulting impacts to wildlife. The DEIS must take a “hard
look” at these impacts abroad.  Given CEQ’s recognition that
analysis of transboundary impacts is a constructive step towards
implementation of treaty obligations, DOS should also consider the
recent International 285

40 C.F.R. § 1508.7.  See, e.g., O’Reilly v. United States Army
Corps of Engineers, 477 F.3d 225 (5th Cir. 2007); Great Basin Mine
Watch v. Hankins, 456 F.3d 955 (9th Cir. 2006); Native Ecosystems
Council v.  Dombeck, 304 F.3d 886 (9th Cir. 2002); Grand Canyon
Trust v. Federal Aviation Admin., 290 F.3d 339 (D.C. Cir. 2002).
287 Guidance on NEPA Analyses for Transboundary Impacts. (July 1,
1997), available at http://ceq.hss.doe.gov/nepa/regs/transguide.html
(last visited June 8, 2010) and attached as Exhibit 104.  288 Id. at
¶ 4 (emphasis added).  289 Id. at ¶ 6 (emphasis added).  286

Court of Justice “ICJ” ruling in a dispute between Argentina
v. Uruguay, involving pollution from pulp mills constructed along
a shared river.290 In its decision, the ICJ stated that “it may
now be considered a requirement under general international law
to undertake an environmental impact assessment where there is a
risk that the proposed industrial activity may have a significant
adverse impact in a transboundary context, in particular, on a shared
resource.” Id. at 61. Just as in Argentina v. Uruguay, the instant
project involves cooperation between two countries to undertake an
industrial activity that impacts shared resources, primarily wildlife
including wildlife (migratory birds) protected by a treaty between
the United States and Canada.  The DOS acknowledges that this Project
will have significant impacts on the environment both in the U.S and
in Canada. Under CEQ guidance and the clear precedent of the Manitoba
decision, the NEPA obligation to take a “hard look” at reasonably
foreseeable direct, indirect, and cumulative impacts does not end
at the international border.  In addition to transboundary impacts,
DOS fails to adequately analyze the impacts of expanded U.S. pipeline
carrying capacity and refining of heavy crude from the Canadian tar
sands. Moreover, the DEIS does not consider the environmental impacts
of tar sands extraction or the indirect end use impacts of increased
consumption of tar sands oil. Thus the DEIS fails to satisfy NEPA’s
indirect and cumulative analysis requirement.  a.

The DEIS fails to adequately analyze the indirect and cumulative
impacts of refining heavy tar sands crude

The Draft EIS does not adequately consider all of the indirect and
cumulative impacts of refinery expansions necessary to refine the
increased amount of tar sands oil that will be imported into the United
States.291 Although, as described above, commenters believe that there
is no evidence of future increases in demand for liquid fossil fuels,
the stated purpose and need for the Keystone XL pipelines as set forth
in the DEIS relies on the proposition that there is.  DOS must either
revise their assessment of the need for a new crude oil pipeline or
they must fully assess the impacts of the pipeline according to the
assumptions on which the project is premised. Moreover, permitting
investment in this pipeline and the associated infrastructure will lock
in dependence on oil at a time when development of alternative sources
of energy is a priority for achieving the current administration’s
energy security and climate change goals.  Sunk capital costs make it
more difficult to development necessary alternatives to fossil fuels
because existing technologies frequently have an economic advantage
over new technologies trying to break into the market.  The Keystone
XL pipeline proposal along with other investments being made in tar
sands infrastructure is catalyzing expansions at several refineries in
the U.S. and as a consequence will cause additional local and global
pollution. Refining heavy crude oil extracted from tar sands 290

Argentina v. Uruguay, (I.C.J. April 20, 2010), available at,
http://www.icjcij.org/docket/files/135/15877.pdf (last visited June 29,
2010) and attached as Exhibit 104A.  291 For additional detail on the
modifications and expansions required for a refinery to shift from
refining light and medium crude to refining the types of heavy crude
produced by tar sands development, see Gary Brierly, et. al., Changing
Refinery Configuration for Heavy and Synthetic Crude Processing, UOP,
LLC (2006), attached as Exhibit 105.  91

requires more energy inputs than refining lighter crude due to the
energy needed to crack the heavy, long hydrocarbon molecules into
final products and remove the high levels sulfur contaminants.292
This process yields significant increases in emissions of pollutants
including heavy metals such as mercury, conventional air pollutants
(in particular sulfur dioxide and carbon monoxide) and carbon
dioxide.293 The necessity for revised CWA permits to be issued for
these expansions also reflect significant increases in the discharge
of water contaminants294 which indicate impacts to local waterbodies
throughout PADDs II and III. The increase of emissions of air
pollution, greenhouse gas emissions that lead to climate change, and
discharges of water contaminants has serious implications for public
health in local communities near the refineries being upgraded,
contribute to regional pollution and global climate change, and
have potentially dire consequences for wildlife. The DEIS fails to
adequately analyze these impacts.  b.

The DEIS fails to adequately analyze the indirect and cumulative
impacts of tar sands extraction on Birds and Wildlife

The tar sands are a geologic formation that lie beneath approximately
149,000 square kilometers of Alberta’s northeastern boreal
forest. The Boreal Forest is a permanent or temporary home to many
species sensitive to industrial development, such as caribou, whooping
crane, and lynx. Many of these species migrate across the U.S./Canadian
border. But open pit mining turns this valuable ancient forest into a
wasteland, destroying acres of forest and polluting waters. Drilling
in the tar sands requires such a complex network of wells, roads,
and pipes in areas where drilling is taking place, that every part
of the forest will be within a few hundred yards of an industrial
intrusion. Although the companies in the tar sands assert that the
land is reclaimed after mining, there has not yet been any mine fully
reclaimed.295 Forest, peatlands, and wetlands ecosystems are highly
complex, and it is unlikely they will regenerate in areas filled with
mine waste.296 Acre for acre, peat bogs are the single best carbon
sink of any habitat in terms of tons of carbon captured and stored.297
Their destruction in this process adds to the negative climate change
impacts as stored greenhouse gases are released and capture capacity is
lost. The indirect impacts to the Boreal Forest that result from this
project such as increased tar sands extraction and related activities
such as the construction of highly toxic tailings ponds, as well as
the cumulative impacts resulting to the Boreal Forest from this and
other pipeline projects, tar sands extraction, water withdrawals,
tailings ponds, and other activities involved in the construction
and operation of both the pipelines and the tar sands extraction,
has not be adequately examined by the DEIS.  292

Id.  See Declaration of Dr. Ranajit Sahu, ¶ 9, attached as
Exhibit 72.  294 See American Bottom Conservancy and Sierra
Club’s “Petition for review of Prevention of Significant
Deterioration approval set forth in Permit No. 06050052 (Facility
Identification No.  119090AAA)” (Aug. 21, 2007), attached
as Exhibit 106.  295 Canadian Parks and Wilderness Society, A
Response to the Mineable Oil Sands Strategy, (Dec. 2005) attached
as Exhibit 45.  296 Id.  297 UNEP Report, The Natural Fix? The
Role of Ecosystems in Climate Mitigation (2009) at 28, available at
http://www.grida.no/_res/site/file/publications/natural-fix/BioseqRRA_scr.pdf
(last visited June 29, 2010), attached as Exhibit 105A.  293

c.

The DEIS fails to adequately analyze the indirect and cumulative
impacts on Birds i.

Toxic waste and large-scale water withdrawals threaten delicate
wetlands and river ecosystems.

Both mining and drilling operations in the tar sands have severe
impacts on water supply and quality in Alberta. To extract the tar
sands the soil is strip-mined and subjected to hightemperature steam
to separate the oil from the sand producing a heavy, dirty crude. If
the sands lie too deep beneath the surface for strip mining (generally
over 100 meters), in situ extraction is used by heating the tar sands
to the bitumen can flow to a well and be pumped to the surface.298
The tar sands region is rich in wetlands in the form of bogs, fens,
shallow ponds, shoreline marshes, and river delta systems, such as
the Peace-Athabasca Delta just downstream from the tar sands (to
the north). The Alberta Chamber of Resources has identified water
use as one of the top-four key challenges for mining operations.299
Mining operations require dredging wetlands and taking large amounts
of water from the rivers. The ecological integrity of any aquatic
ecosystems requires that adequate flows and seasonal variations in
flow be maintained.  Fish populations such as walleye, goldeye, and
long-nose sucker are vulnerable, particularly when water withdrawals
reduce winter habitat in the Athabasca River.300 But water allocations
for existing, approved, and planned tar sands mining operations
are expected to quadruple over allocations for existing projects in
2004.301 In-situ operations that take water from underground aquifers
can also harm the area’s water supply. The hydrology in this region
is a complex network of underground freshwater and saline aquifers,
ground waters, and wetlands. The links among these systems are not
yet fully understood, nor are the impacts of the water withdrawals
on surface land and waters.302 One specific concern is that taking
water out of underground aquifers could cause surface water tables
to sink – for example, causing a loss of wetlands and habitat.303
Current tar sands operations are permitted to remove enough water to
meet the needs of a city of 2 million people, and water removal is
projected to increase by 50 percent as planned tar sands projects
become operational.  Changes to Alberta’s rivers and underground
reservoirs could have profound impacts on the

Woynillowicz, Dan, Oil Sands Fever, The Pembina
Institute (2005), supra note 88, at 11, available at,
http://pubs.pembina.org/reports/OilSands72.pdf (last visited June 29,
2010) and attached as Exhibit 37.  299 Alberta Chamber of Resources,
Oil Sands Technology Roadmap – Unlocking the Potential (2004) at 21,
available at, http://www.acr-alberta.com/OSTR_report.pdf (last visited
June 8, 2010) and attached as Exhibit 46.  300 Mary Griffiths et al.,
Troubled Waters, Troubling Trends, The Pembina Institute (2006) at
69, available at, http://pubs.pembina.org/reports/TroubledW_Full.pdf
(last visited June 8, 2010).  301 Woynillowicz, supra note 88, at 35,
attached as Exhibit 47.  302 Id. at 71.  303 Griffiths, supra note 300,
at 20.  93

hundreds of thousands of birds that are dependent on the wetland
habitats in the tar sands and Peace-Athabasca Delta and other parts
of the Mackenzie River watershed.304 Tar sands mines also require
extensive human-made wastewater reservoirs or “tailings ponds” that
pose an enormous potential threat to wildlife and water. Collectively,
these pools of waste cover approximately 50 square miles – an area
twice the size of Manhattan – and are so vast that they can be seen
from space.305 These waste holding facilities and their associated
dikes are some of the largest human-made structures in the world. The
largest tailings ponds measure more than 3 miles across.306 The high
concentrations of pollutants in tar sands tailings ponds are acutely
toxic.307 The toxicity of the ponds is due to their mixture of bitumen,
salts, naphthenicacids, and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs)
together with water, sand, silt, and fine clay. Naphthenic acids,
when first released from the mining process, can be acutely toxic, as
can PAHs. Both naphthenic acids and PAHs can have sublethal impacts on
animals including carcinogenic and mutagenic effects.308 These ponds
represent a serious threat to the hundreds of thousands of waterfowl
that migrate through the Athabasca River valley each year.309 Annual
bird mortality from landings and drowning in the oily water in current
tar sands tailings ponds could range from more than 8,000 birds to
well over 100,000. A doubling of tailings ponds—likely with proposed
tar sands mining expansions spurred by the Keystone XL pipeline and
other U.S. pipelines—would increase projected annual bird deaths to
between 17,000 to 300,000 individuals.310 It is difficult to estimate
the number of birds that may be killed annually at tar sands tailings
ponds, but one recent paper noted that hundreds of birds are typically
known to be oiled every year at each of 10 or more tailings ponds in
the region.311

Wells, Jeff, Danger in the Nursery, Natural Resources Defense Council
(2008), available at, http://www.nrdc.org/wildlife/fborealbirds.pdf
(last visited June 8, 2010) and attached as Exhibit 107.  305 Nat’l
Wildlife Federation, Staying Hooked on a Dirty Fuel: Why Canadian Tar
Sand Are a Bad Bet for the United States (2010), at 8, available at,
https://www.nwf.org/News-andMagazines/MediaCenter/Reports/Archive/2010/~/media/PDFs/Global%20Warming/Reports/NWF_TarSands_final
.ashx (last visited June 29, 2010) and attached as Exhibit 71.
306 Wells, supra note 304, at 8.  307 Naturally occurring naphthenic
acids – a class of organic acids found within crude oils and known
to be toxic to a range of aquatic organisms – in rivers in this
region are generally below 1 mg/L, but those concentrations may be as
high as 110 mg/L in the tailings ponds. See Woynillowicz, supra n. 10
at 31.  308 Wells, supra note 304, at 8.  309 Id.  310 See id. at 2.
311 Id. at 9 (citing Ronconi, R.A. and C.C. St. Clair, Efficacy of
Radar-Activated On-Demand System for Deterring Waterfowl from Oil
Sands Tailing Ponds, 43 Journal of Applied Ecology 111-9 (2006)).  94

As some of the largest bodies of water in the area, these tailings
ponds represent seemingly attractive short-term resting stops for
upward of 400,000 migrant waterfowl heading to the Peace-Athabasca
Delta and beyond. Unfortunately, these ponds can serve as death traps
for waterfowl and shorebirds, which can become oiled with waste
bitumen after landing in a pond. Oiled birds can become weighed
down and incapable of flight or can face death from hypothermia
after their feathers lose their insulating properties. Heavily oiled
birds often sink rapidly, making it difficult to measure the number
of birds killed on the tailings ponds. The deadly effects of these
tailings ponds are most likely to be seen during early spring, when
natural water bodies are still frozen and the tailings ponds are the
area’s only open water, and during severe weather conditions, when
migrating birds are forced out of the sky into any seemingly suitable
habitat. To chase off migratory birds, propane cannons go off at random
intervals and scarecrows stand guard on floating barrels. However,
these measures often do not work, as was sadly evidenced by a spring
2008 incident where approximately 1,600 waterfowl died after landing
in these immense, toxic ponds.312 At least 38 species have been
documented as casualties on tar sands tailings ponds, including many
waterfowl and shorebird species but also birds such as Red-tailed Hawk,
Willow Ptarmigan, Evening Grosbeak, and Tree Swallow.313 Additionally,
since many of the tailings ponds are next to water bodies such as the
Athabasca River, and there are concerns about potential leakage from
existing tailings ponds and from future “remediated” or buried
tailings. Alberta Environment does not regulate naphthenic acids, and
future management of these pollutants is fraught with uncertainty.314
The DEIS fails to examine these indirect and cumulative impacts. It
must do so.  ii.

Impacts from Tar Sands Extraction

Expansion of tar sands extraction in the Boreal Forest resulting from
this project and other tar sands pipeline projects will also have a
significant impact on birds, many of which migrate between the U.S. and
Canada. Strip mining causes habitat loss. Tailing ponds kill oiled
birds (as described above). Drilling fragments habitat. Intensive water
withdrawals harm wetlands and water habitats. Bioaccumulation of air
and water toxins endanger bird health. And climate change threatens
their habitats and food supplies.315 The projected strip mining of
740,000 acres (300,000 hectares) of forests and wetlands in the tar
sands will result in the loss of breeding habitat for between 480,000
and 3.6 million adult birds. The corresponding impact on breeding will
mean a loss of between 4.8 million and 36 million young birds over
a 20-year period, to between 9.6 million and 72 million birds over a
40-year period.316 Tar sands drilling projects are projected to result
in the loss of more forest-dependent bird habitat than strip mining

Nat’l Wildlife Federation, Staying Hooked, supra, at 7.  Id. at 8-9.
314 Id. at 32; Alberta Chamber of Resources, Oil Sands Technology
Roadmap – Unlocking the Potential (2004) at 36, available at,
http://www.acr-alberta.com/OSTR_report.pdf (last visited June 29,
2010) and attached as Exhibit 46.  315 Wells, supra note 304, at 7-17.
316 Id. at 8.  313

and could harm as many as 14.5 million breeding birds from direct
habitat loss and as many as 76 million birds from fragmentation and
habitat degradation over a 30 to 50 year period.317 Among the birds
that are threatened by the loss of the Boreal Forest habitat, several
are on the Audubon Society Watch List, such as Canada and Bay-breasted
Warblers, Olive-sided Flycatcher, and Rusty Blackbird, due to their
rapid decline in numbers and loss of habitat. The Whooping Crane –
which is listed as endangered under the Endangered Species Act – is
of particular concern because the only naturally remaining migratory
population nests in the Wood Buffalo National Park just north of the
tar sands mines. Birds from this population migrate over the Boreal
Forest and occasionally stop-over in wetlands.318 Their breeding
success is jeopardized in dry years, and most climate change scenarios
predict more dry years within the region where they nest.319 Further,
heavy water withdrawals for the extraction of the tar sands may
eventually drain the wetlands on which the Whooping Cranes depend.
Overall, combining the various estimates of the loss of birds from
mining and in situ operations, Natural Resources Defense Council
(one of the groups commenting) projects a cumulative impact ranging
from a low of about 6.4 million birds lost to as high as 166 million
forest dependent birds lost over 30 to 50 years. This represents a
potential decline of between 10 to 50 percent of forest-dependent
breeding birds based only on loss of adult breeding birds. And even
beyond the direct habitat effects outlined here, there are many other
impacts to birds that, while harder to quantify, are known or expected
to cause further major negative problems for birds and other wildlife
as tar sands development increases.320 These indirect and cumulative
impacts must be assessed. They are not.  d.

The DEIS fails to adequately analyze the indirect and cumulative
impacts to other species

Migratory birds are not the only animals endangered by the expansion
of tar sand mining in the Boreal Forest. Woodland Caribou (Rangifer
tarandus-caribou) and Grizzly Bears, listed as threatened or endangered
in both the U.S. and Canada, also rely heavily on the Boreal Forest
for their critical habitat. Both species need large expanses of
forest, undisturbed by human activity, to effectively maintain their
numbers.321 Caribou, which survive winters on lichen in old growth
forests, often more than 60 years old, are threatened by the loss
of these woods. They also require large amounts of space to avoid
predators.322 Further, the increase in young forest 317

Id. at 2.  Id. at 3..  319 Id. at 20.  320 Id. at
13.  321 Sierra Club of Canada et al., “Uncertain
Future: Woodland Caribou and Canada’s Boreal Forest,
a Report on Government Action” (2006) at 1, available at
http://www.mvlwb.ca/Library/Uncertain%20Future%20%20Woodland%20Caribou%20and%20Canada's%20Boreal%20Forest.pdf
(last visited June 8, 2010) and attached as Exhibit 108.  322 Committee
on the Status of Endangered Wildlife in Canada Update and Status
Report on the Woodland Caribou (2002) at 29, available at 318

attracts other prey animals and increases the occurrence of predators,
while roads, pipeline right of ways, and increased infrastructure
increases the efficiency of predators and access for human hunters.323
Grizzly Bears (Ursus arctos horribilis) are threatened by loss
of habitat, especially for females raising young, which “often
inhabit remote areas away from the presence of other bears in order
to maximize cub safety and facilitate undisturbed interactions of
mothers with their cubs.”324 The northwest population is listed
as of “special concern” in Alberta by Canada, and the species is
listed as “threatened” by the US FWS across virtually all of the
lower 48 states.  Any further industrialization or human incursion
into the Boreal Forest presents significant dangers to these species.
As detailed above, extraction practices in Canada will also have
impacts to fish species, with fish populations such as walleye,
goldeye, and long-nose sucker are vulnerable, particularly when water
withdrawals reduce winter habitat in the Athabasca River. Water
allocations for existing, approved, and planned tar sands mining
operations are expected to quadruple over allocations for existing
projects in 2004.325 These impacts are not considered by the DEIS. They
must be.  In addition to species impacted in Canada, increased refining
in the Gulf Coast means more mercury and suspended solids being
released into the waters as well as increased acid rain.  This may
further endanger aquatic species in the Gulf Coast and other areas
that are already struggling in the face of habitat modification due
to climate change, massive disruptions of the food web from invasive
species, and the ongoing persistent effects and bio-accumulation of
toxins such as mercury and PCBs. Major impacts are likely from tar
sands air and water pollution causing the accumulation of toxins in
tissues, from acid rain and nitrogen deposition, air pollution and
heavy metals. Birds can inhale, ingest, or come into contact with
contaminants; these contaminants can build up in the tissues and lead
to weakened birds, problems with reproduction, and often to eventual
death. Pollution can also lead to changes in habitat and food which
will indirectly harm the health of birds. And these effects are not
limited to birds—tar sands toxins can affect other wildlife and local
human populations as well.326 The DEIS fails to consider the indirect
and cumulative impacts that increased tar sands extraction generated
by new pipeline and refining capacity would have on sensitive species
in both the US and Canada. This failure should be addressed before
the EIS is finalized.

http://www.sararegistry.gc.ca/virtual_sara/files/cosewic/sr_woodland_caribou_e.pdf
(last visited June 8, 2010) and attached as Exhibit 109.
323 Sierra Club of Canada, Uncertain Future, supra note
321, at 5.  324 Canadian Parks and Wilderness Society,
Edmonton Chapter, et al., Endangered Boreal Forests: Rocky
Mountain Foothills of Alberta, (2003) at 13, available at
http://www.forestethics.org/downloads/rep_boreal_rocky_mtn.pdf (last
visited June 8, 2010) and attached as Exhibit 110.  325 Woynillowicz,
supra note 88, at 35.  326 Wells, supra note 304, at 3.  97

3.

Additional Cumulative and Indirect Impacts on Wildlife in Light of
Climate Change

This project serves to both be an initial disrupter of
grassland/rangeland and scrubland habitat particularly in the
northern sections of the project, and to add to already existing
fragmentation problems in the Gulf Coast section of the project.327
The DEIS concludes that such disruption causes impacts on species
as they adjust to the changes brought about by the project and that
“[i]ncreased movement or displacement of species dependent on the
disturbed habitats could reduce carrying capacities, reproductive
effort, or survival.”328 The DEIS notes that “[l]ong-term
cumulative impacts on wildlife would occur in areas where habitat
is not allowed to return to preconstruction conditions and in areas
where long time periods are required for wildlife habitat to become
re-established. Implementation of appropriate mitigation measures,
including habitat restoration, would minimize most long-term cumulative
impacts on wildlife.”329 Again, when looking at cumulative impacts,
the DEIS completely omits any assessment of the impacts of climate
change on both the long term impacts to species of cumulative
habitat fragmentation coupled with the stresses of climate change,
as well as the influence that climate change will have on restoration
of forested areas and other habitats that will only “recover”
over the long-term.  The DEIS also fails to assess the cumulative
impacts the Project and other heavy crude oil pipelines will have on
the actual emissions of greenhouse gases. These pipelines encourage
the production of this extremely carbon intensive fuel source at the
expense of development of cleaner, lower emissions fuel sources. In
order to foster informed public participation, a NEPA analysis must
contain a “reasonably thorough” discussion that addresses important
issues “up front.” Nat’l Parks & Conservation Ass’n v. Bureau
of Land Mgmt., 586 F.3d 735, 750 (9th Cir.  2008). Accordingly,
an agency’s decision is clearly arbitrary and capricious and must
be set aside when the agency has “entirely failed to consider an
important aspect of the problem . . . .” Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n
v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983). In other
words, if a land management agency has completely failed to analyze a
particular environmental issue, it is entitled to no deference, and its
decision must be set aside. Oregon Natural Desert Ass'n v. Bureau of
Land Mgmt., 531 F.3d 1114, 1142 (9th Cir. 2008). In Massachusetts. v.
Environmental Protection Agency, 549 U.S. 497 (2007), the U.S. Supreme
Court acknowledged the reality of climate change. It found that:
While it may be true that regulating motor-vehicle emissions will not
by itself reverse global warming, it by no means follows that we lack
jurisdiction to decide whether EPA has a duty to take steps to slow or
reduce it . . . . A reduction in domestic emissions would slow the pace
of global emissions increases, no matter what happens elsewhere.330

DEIS at 3.14-23.  DEIS at 3.14-23.  329 DEIS at 3.14-23 330
Massachusetts, 549 U.S. at 525.  328

Subsequently, the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals addressed the
need to assess climate change in Center for Biological Diversity
v. National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, 538 F.3d 1172
(9th Cir. 2008). In Center for Biological Diversity, the Court found
that a federal agency had violated NEPA by failing to consider the
cumulative impact of carbon dioxide emissions on climate change. More
specifically, this Court held that “[t]he impact of greenhouse
gas emissions on climate change is precisely the kind of cumulative
impacts analysis that NEPA requires agencies to conduct.”331 The
court in Center for Biological Diversity did not find persuasive the
agency’s argument that many other factors outside of its control are
causing climate change. On the contrary, it stressed the importance
of addressing individual incremental actions that foreseeably and
collectively contribute to climate change. Late last year, the EPA
filed a formal finding that climate change poses serious adverse
impacts to public health and the environment.332 There is little
question that tar sands development and refinement will emit greenhouse
gases and contribute to climate change. Yet, the impacts of climate
change on wildlife are ignored by the DEIS.  The DEIS also fails
to examine the impacts of the project on threatened and endangered
species in light of climate change. There are many endangered species
facing threats from climate change, and this project exacerbates
their plight.333 For instance, melting of the polar ice has lead
to the listing of the polar bear as threatened, and the elkhorn and
staghorn coral specifically discuss the impacts of climate change in
their final listings. Other endangered animals being threatened by
climate change include the Southwestern Willow Flycatcher, the Mexican
Spotted Owl, the Bald Eagle, Salmon, and Desert Bighorn Sheep. The
DEIS addresses only species that would be directly impacted by the
project, when it should also have taken into consideration species
that will lose significant habitat to climate change.  A recent Draft
NEPA Guidance issued by the Council of Environmental Quality finds
that climate change may add stressors upon the environment that need
consideration.334 Climate change threatens to push many species to
the brink of extinction and will make additional stressors, like
the project, upon species more damaging to species’ chances of
survival.335 The ESA requires that DOS, in consultation with FWS,
examine “the direct and indirect effects of an 331

Center for Biological Diversity, 538 F.3d at 1217.  Endangerment and
Cause or Contribute Findings for Greenhouse Gases Under Section
202(a) of the Clean Air Act, 74 Fed. Reg. 66495 (Dec. 15,
2009), attached as Exhibit 111.  333 See, Brennan, E. Jean,
Reducing the Impact of Global Warming on Wildlife: The Science,
Management and Policy Challenges Ahead, Defenders of Wildlife
(2008), attached as Exhibit 112.  334 Memorandum for Heads
of Federal Dep’ts and Agencies, from Nancy H. Sutley, Chair,
Council on Environmental Quality (Feb. 18. 2010), at 6-7, available at
http://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/microsites/ceq/20100218-nepa-considerationeffects-ghg-draft-guidance.pdf
(last visited June 29, 2010), and attached as Exhibit 119.
335 See, e.g., Thomas, Chris d., et al., Extinction risk from
climate change, 427 Nature 145 (Jan.  2004), available at,
http://eprints.whiterose.ac.uk/83/1/thomascd1.pdf (last visited June
29, 2010), and attached as Exhibit 120 (finding that due to climate
change “on the basis of mid-range climate-warming scenarios for 2050,
that 15–37% of species in our sample of regions and taxa will be
‘committed to extinction’.”) 332

action on the species and critical habitat, together with the effects
of other activities that are interrelated or interdependent with that
action, that will be added to the environmental baseline.”336 The
“environmental baseline” is “the past and present impacts of all
Federal, State, or private actions and other human activities in the
action area, the anticipated impacts of all proposed Federal projects
in the action area that have already undergone formal or early section
7 consultation, and the impact of State or private actions which are
contemporaneous with the consultation in process.”337 “Indirect
effects” are “those that are caused by the proposed action
and are later in time, but still are reasonable foreseeable.”338
The disturbance and fragmentation of habitat and the emission of
greenhouse gases caused by the project are clearly direct effects
that must be considered. These actions also have indirect effects
on these species, especially when habitat fragmentation is viewed in
light of climate change and how that may impacts species migration,
breeding, feeding and other necessities for survival. Yet, the DEIS
fails to assess how climate change, in combination with the project,
will impact ESA listed species.339 It must do so.  4.

The Project Will Result in Violations of the Endangered Species Act
and Migratory Bird Treaty Act

The NEPA duties and the ESA Section 7 duties of the action agencies are
often considered together in a combined environmental and biological
assessment. The ESA requires that action agencies consult with the
wildlife agencies, in this case FWS, to determine how the action
agencies can use their authorities to further the conservation of
listed species (section 7(a)(1)) as well as to avoid jeopardizing their
existence (section 7(a)(2)).340 Section 7(a)(2) of the ESA requires
the following: Each Federal agency shall, in consultation with and
with the assistance of the Secretary [of the Interior], insure that
any action authorized, funded, or carried out by such agency . . . is
not likely to jeopardize the continued existence of any endangered
species or threatened species or result in the destruction or adverse
modification of habitat of such species which is determined by the
Secretary, after consultation as appropriate with affected States, to
be critical.341 Section 7(a)(2) imposes two obligations upon federal
agencies. The first is procedural and requires that agencies consult
with the FWS or NMFS to determine the effects of their actions on 336

40 C.F.R. § 402.02.  Id. “Action area” is broadly defined as
“all areas to be affected directly or indirectly by the Federal
action and not merely the immediate area involved in the action.” Id.
338 Id.  339 See Natural Resources Defense Council v. Kempthorne, 506
F. Supp. 2d 322, 367-70 (E.D.  Cal. 2007) (biological opinion for Delta
smelt inadequate because it failed to account for how climate change
might impact future flow patterns).  340 16 U.S.C. §§ 1536(a)(1)-(2)
341 16 U.S.C. § 1536(a)(2).  337

endangered or threatened species and their critical habitat342. The
second is substantive and requires that agencies insure that their
actions not jeopardize endangered or threatened species or their
critical habitat.343 An agency must initiate consultation under
Section 7 whenever it takes an action that “may affect” a listed
species.344 Regulations implementing Section 7 broadly define
the scope of agency actions subject to consultation.345 Courts
have construed this term broadly.346 ESA regulations provide for
an optional, informal consultation between the acting agency and
the FWS or NMFS prior to a determination that formal consultation
is required.347 Formal consultation “is a process between the
[FWS or NMFS] and the [acting] Federal agency that commences
with the Federal agency's written request for consultation under
section 7(a)(2) of the Act.”348 It is required if an acting agency
determines that any action it takes “may affect listed species or
critical habitat.”349 Following formal consultation, FWS or NMFS
(the consulting agency) is required to issue the acting agency
“a written statement setting forth the [consulting agency’s]
opinion, and a summary of the information on which the opinion is
based, detailing how the agency action affects the species or its
critical habitat.”350 This statement is referred to as a biological
opinion.  Pending the completion of the consultation process, agency
actions that may affect listed species cannot go forward.351 If the
consulting agency finds “jeopardy or adverse modification” to a
listed species or its critical habitat, “the [consulting agency]
shall suggest those reasonable and prudent alternatives which [it]
believes would not violate subsection (a)(2).”352 If the consulting
agency makes a finding of “jeopardy or adverse modification,”
the acting agency must either “terminate the action, implement the
proposed alternative, or seek an exemption from the Cabinet-level
Endangered Species Committee pursuant to 16 U.S.C. § 1536(e).”353

16 U.S.C. § 1536(b).  16 U.S.C. § 1536(a)(2); Fla. Key Deer
v. Paulison, 522 F.3d 1133, 1138 (11th Cir. 2008).  344 50 C.F.R. §
402.14(a).  345 See 50 C.F.R § 402.02 (defining “agency action”).
346 E.g., Natural Res. Def. Council v. Houston, 146 F.3d 1118,
1125 (9th Cir. 1998), cert. denied, 526 U.S. 1111 (1999); Pacific
Rivers Council v. Thomas, 30 F.3d 1050, 1054–55 (9th Cir. 1994),
cert. denied, 514 U.S. 1082 (1995); Connor v. Burford, 848 F.2d
1441, 1453 (9th Cir. 1988), cert. denied, 489 U.S. 1012 (1989).
347 50 C.F.R. § 402.02, 402.13.  348 50 C.F.R. § 402.02.  349 50
C.F.R. § 402.14(a).  350 16 U.S.C. § 1536(b)(3)(A); 50 C.F.R. §
402.02 351 See Thomas v. Peterson, 753 F.2d 754, 764 (9th Cir. 1985)
(“If a project is allowed to proceed without substantial compliance
with those procedural requirements, there can be no assurance that a
violation of the ESA’s substantive provisions will not result. The
latter, of course, is impermissible.”) (citation omitted).
352 16 U.S.C. § 1536(b)(3)(A).  353 Fla. Key Deer, 522 F.3d at 1139
(citing Nat’l Ass’n of Home Builders v. Defenders of Wildlife,
551 U.S. 644, 652 (2007)).


The DEIS completely fails to analyze the impacts of the project to
endangered species in Canada, and, as described below, inadequately
fails to analyze the impacts to endangered species in the United
States. Three species listed as endangered under the ESA in both the
U.S. and Canada – the Whooping Crane, the Woodland Caribou, and the
Piping Plover – are clearly affected by the proposed pipeline and any
DOS approval of a presidential permit allowing for the construction of
the proposed pipeline because the pipeline will facilitate development
of tar sands in Canada that will adversely impact these species. There
is no mention in the DEIS that the required consultation with US FWS
has occurred regarding impacts to these species from the development of
tar sands, or that such consultation is occurring or will occur. This
failure to comply with the ESA and analyze impacts to these species
also violates NEPA.354 a.

The Project will affect sensitive species i.

Woodland Caribou

Woodland caribou are an endangered species found at low densities
across the Boreal Forest of northern Alberta on land that underlies
the Athabasca tar sands deposit. Surface and in situ mining in this
region poses a serious threat to woodland caribou through habitat
loss, habitat fragmentation, and sensory disturbance.355 Woodland
caribou populations in the Athabasca Valley have already declined by
50 percent over the past 10 years and studies predict caribou will
become extinct if planned tar sands projects are implemented.356 In
2008 the Canadian government announced that most of Alberta’s caribou
herds are no longer capable of sustaining themselves without ongoing
intensive management.357 Woodland caribou are extremely sensitive to
disturbance and stay well back from the dense network of roads, seismic
lines, and well sites that tar sands development requires. These 354

Applicable regulations state that under Section 7(a)(2) of the ESA,
Federal agencies, in consultation with US FWS, must “insure that any
action it authorizes, funds, or carries out, in the United States or
upon the high seas, is not likely to jeopardize the continued existence
of any listed species or results in the destruction or adverse
modification of critical habitat.” 50 C.F.R.  § 402.01. However,
the regulations do not limit the scope of impacts to species that must
be examined to only those within the United States or high seas. In
fact, applicable regulations defined the “action area” that must
be analyzed as “all areas to be affected directly or indirectly by
the Federal action and not merely the immediate area involved in the
action.” Id. § 402.02.  The term “action area” is not limited
by a geographic boundary that would limit consultation to impacts in
the U.S. or the high seas. The project is clearly one DOS intend to
authorize in the United States, and the action area encompasses those
areas indirectly affected, including those areas impacted by the tar
sands extraction.  355 Collister, Douglas M. and Terry Antoniuk, Review
and Assessment of Environmental Effects Information for Wildlife and
Fish Indicators in the Regional Sustainable Development Strategy Study
Area within the Athabasca Oil Sands Region, at 169-175. Cumulative
Environmental Management Association (2003) attached as Exhibit 113.
356 Canada’s Tar Sands, at 2, International Boreal Conservation
Campaign (2008), attached as Exhibit 114.  357 Yeoman, Barry, Crude
Awakening, Audubon Magazine Online, attached as Exhibit 115.  102

anthropogenic barriers have not only caused direct habitat loss
from cleared vegetation, they have also contributed to habitat
fragmentation which reduces the areas of effective habitat that can
support viable populations.358 Caribou require extensive tracts of
habitat in order to maintain low population densities across their
range and evade predators that typically hunt in areas of high density
or predictability.359 Movement also facilitates access to necessary
resources and aids in mate selection.  The infrastructure required by
tar sands development has the potential to block caribou movement,
concentrating populations into smaller, more isolated patches where
they become more susceptible to predation and will face significant
social and reproductive challenges. As the populations of woodland
caribou and other sensitive species decline, species more tolerant
to disturbance, such as moose and deer, will increase.360 These
changes lead to increases in the number of predators, especially
wolves, and a subsequent increase in predation threat to caribou.
Reductions in caribou range are caused not only by the actual loss
and fragmentation of habitat but also by caribou avoiding quality
habitat because of noise and increased human presence.361 Sensory
disturbance has the potential to effect caribou survival and/or
reproduction by increasing their rate of movement, decreasing the
amount of time spent feeding, and preventing caribou from using high
quality forage and cover resources.362 ii.

Whooping Crane

As stated above, the Canadian Boreal Forest is one of the world’s
most important breeding areas for migratory birds. The only wild,
migratory population of the endangered Whooping Crane nests solely
in the Wood Buffalo National Park just north of the largest tar
sands deposits. Birds from this population migrate through the tar
sands region and are highly dependent on wetland locations as stop
over points along their route.363 Tar sands mining causes habitat
loss, damage to wetlands, and air and water contaminants that pose
a serious threat to the whooping crane.364 Site preparation for
surface mining requires draining all lakes and wetlands, diverting
any rivers that flow through the minable area, clearcutting forests,
and removing vegetation.365 This results in direct habitat loss and
reduces the amount of quality habitat for the whooping crane on its
long migration. Although the industry is required to somehow reclaim
lands they have 358

Collister, supra note 355, at 172-173.  Athabasca Caribou Landscape
Management Options Report, at 11, Athabasca Landscape Team (2009)
attached as Exhibit 116.  360 Schneider, Richard and Simon Dyer, Death
By A Thousand Cuts, at 16, The Pembina Institute (2006), attached as
Exhibit 117.  361 Woynillowicz, supra note 88, at 37.  362 Collister,
supra note 355, at 175.  363 Wells, supra note 304, at 3.  364 Id. at
7.  365 Griffiths, Mary, Troubled Waters, Troubling Trends, at 31,
The Pembina Institute (2006), attached as Exhibit 47.  359

altered, it is unlikely that these landscapes will ever be fully
restored.366 Peatlands, a type of wetland and favored habitat for
the whooping crane, take thousands of years to develop and cannot
be recreated. Wetlands surrounding tar sands deposits that are not
directly destroyed may dry up as a result of groundwater extraction
and consequent lowering of the water table.367 Low flows may prevent
recharge and can increase the concentration of pollutants in the
water. In the coming decades, almost 10% of the region’s wetlands
will be destroyed.368 In the absence of wetlands, whooping cranes and
other migratory birds may be drawn to tailings ponds, massive pools
of toxic waste created as a byproduct of mining. As detailed above,
tailing ponds provide fatal magnets for birds, including the whooping
crane, that use the region.369 Tailings ponds could represent a loss
of a significant proportion of the population of species with limited
numbers, such as the whooping crane whose safe passage through the tar
sands region is the first step to a successful breeding season.370
Toxins that seep into the air and water from tar sands operations
may also threaten the whooping crane. Tar sands mining releases
contaminants into the air through upgrading and refining processes,
emissions from vehicles, and from tailings ponds.371 Contaminants
are released into the water through leakage from tailings ponds and
from the release of treated water into the Athabasca River.372 Many
of the toxins released are eventually deposited into aquatic systems
through acid rain and runoff.  iii.

Piping Plover

The piping plover is listed as threatened under the Endangered Species
Act. Piping plovers are migratory birds that breed each summer in the
Boreal Forests underlying the tar sands. Their nesting territories
often include small creeks or wetlands, which will likely be impacted
by tar sands development either directly, as a result of draining, or
indirectly through lower water tables and the release of contaminants
(see above discussion both generally and in terms of the whooping
crane).373 As quality habitat declines, the likelihood of plovers
landing in tailings ponds increases. Piping plovers are also very
sensitive to noise and the presence of humans. Sensory disturbance
in the tar sands region has the potential to effect piping plover
reproduction. 374 Too much disturbance may cause the parent birds to
abandon their nest.  The ESA requires that the action agency must
consult with and comply with the Opinion of the Secretary of the
Interior on fulfilling its section 7(a)(1) and (2) duties on these
three 366

Id. at 79-80.  Wells, supra note 304, at 14.  368 Woynillowicz,
supra note 88, at 37.  369 Canada’s Tar Sands, supra note 356, at 3.
370 Wells, supra note 304, at 9.  371 Id, at 15.  372 Id.  373 Piping
Plover Fact Sheet, at 1, USFWS (2010), attached as Exhibit 118; Wells,
supra note 304, at 7-16.  374 Fact Sheet, supra, at 2.


species (the woodland caribou, whooping crane, and piping
plover). Thus, the DEIS must include information on the impact on
the Canadian and U.S. habitats of these three species not only to
fulfill the statutory scope of NEPA, but of the ESA as well.  b.

Inadequate Information Exists to Assess Effects on Species in the US

Conclusions made in the DEIS and the Appendix T Draft Biological
Assessment that the project will not affect or will not adversely
affect several ESA listed species lack adequate supporting information
to conclude that several species will not be adversely affected
and that formal consultation under section 7(a)(2) of the ESA is
not required. This violates both the ESA, and NEPA. Applicable ESA
regulations require that “[e]ach Federal agency shall review its
actions at the earliest possible time to determine whether any action
may affect listed species or critical habitat. If such a determination
is made, formal consultation is required, except as noted in paragraph
(b) of this section.”375 Formal consultation need not occur “if,
as a result of the preparation of a biological assessment … or as
a result of informal consultation with the Service …, the Federal
agency determines, with the written concurrence of the Director,
that the proposed action is not likely to adversely affect any listed
species or critical habitat.”376 The DEIS concludes that the project
“may affect,” but is “not likely to adversely affect” several
ESA listed species: the black-footed ferret, interior least tern,
whooping crane, pallid sturgeon, Texas prairie dawn flower, piping
plover, Arkansas River shiner, and Western prairie fringed orchid.377
The DEIS also concludes that several species – such as red-cockaded
woodpecker, several sea turtle species, and the Topeka shiner –
will not be effected by the project.378 However, these conclusions
appear to be based on little more than the prepared Draft Biological
Assessment of Keystone (Appendix T of the DEIS). The DEIS does not
include documentation of consultation letters or other correspondence
from U.S. FWS regarding the consultation process, meeting summaries
between U.S. FWS, Keystone and/or the State Department, field
surveys regarding the species at issue, or other similar supporting
documentation. Without such supporting information, it is impossible
to assess whether the conclusions in the DEIS regarding impacts to
ESA listed species are correct, whether these species will not be
adversely affected the project, or what the actual impacts of the
project on these species are.  The justification given in Appendix T
for not including supporting documentation is that field survey reports
“contain specific location information that is confidential.”
The DEIS fails to provide any reason why the information is deemed
to be confidential. Generally, such information is not exempt from
disclosure. See, e.g., Nat’l Ass’n of Homebuilders v. Norton,
309 F.3d 26 (D.C. Cir. 2003) (information regarding location of ESA
listed cactus ferruginous pygmy owl must be disclosed and neither ESA
nor Freedom of Information Act exempts such disclosure where agency
raised as defenses for withholding information landowner privacy,
that 375

50 C.F.R. § 402.14(a).  50 C.F.R. § 402.14(b) (emphasis added).
377 E.g., DEIS at tbl. 3.8.1-1.  378 DEIS at tbl. 3.8.1-1.  376

disclosure was not in the best interests of the species, that the
information was confidential commercial or financial information,
and that the information was exempted under FOIA’s deliberative
process privilege). In this case, it is difficult to understand how
the information in the Appendices to the Draft Biological Assessment
could be deemed confidential and withheld.  Such information contains
field surveys for several species along various parts of the project,
consultation letters, and other routine information. DOS must provide
this information, or adequately explain why it legally cannot be
provided.  c.

Approval of the Project Would Be Arbitrary and Capricious Under the
Administrative Procedure Act Because the Project Will Be In Violation
of the Migratory Bird Treaty Act

The APA governs judicial review of agency action. A court shall “hold
unlawful and set aside agency action, findings, and conclusions
found to be arbitrary, capricious, an abuse of discretion, or
otherwise not in accordance with law.”379 Said another way, an
agency action will be set aside if it breaks the law. An agency
action that breaks the law, such as the Migratory Bird Treaty Act
(“MBTA”), is vulnerable to suit seeking to enforce the no-take
requirement of the MBTA.380 As stated in Fund for Animals v. Norton:
Although “the MBTA provides no private cause of action against
the United States government to enforce its provisions, ... the
law of this Circuit is clear: a plaintiff may sue a federal agency
under the APA for violations of the MBTA.” Center for Biological
Diversity v. Pirie, 191 F. Supp. 2d at 175; see also Hill v. Norton,
275 F.3d [98,]… 103 [(D.C. Cir. 2001)];381 Humane Society of the
United States v. Glickman, 217 F.3d 882 (D.C. Cir. 2000) (holding that
federal agency action in violation of MBTA violates the “otherwise
not in accordance with law” provision of the APA). The APA requires
courts to set aside agency action that is “arbitrary, capricious, an
abuse of discretion, or otherwise not in accordance with the law.” 5
U.S.C. § 706 (2003).382 The MBTA prohibits the “take” of migratory
birds, their nests or eggs, except as permitted by regulation.383 The
statute’s prohibition states that taking is unlawful “at any time,

5 U.S.C. § 706(2)(A).  5 U.S.C. §§ 702-706.  381 The opinion
states, “Because the MBTA does not create a private right of action
or otherwise provide a process for judicial review, the Secretary's
disputed failure to include the mute swan on the List of Migratory
Birds can only be challenged by Hill under the APA.” Hill v. Norton,
275 F.3d. at 103.  382 Fund for Animals v. Norton, 281 F. Supp. 2d 209,
217 (D.C. Cir. 2003).  383 16 U.S.C. § 703. “Take” is defined by
the MBTA as: “pursue, hunt, shoot, capture, collect, kill, or attempt
to pursue, hunt, shoot, capture or kill.” 16 U.S.C. § 715(n).  380

by any means or in any manner.”384 As the DEIS itself states,
“Destruction or disturbance of a migratory bird nest that results
in the loss of eggs or young is a violation of the MBTA.”385 Tar
sands production is likely to cause the loss of millions of migratory
birds that nest in the forests and wetlands of the region.386 The tar
sands deposits lie in the Boreal Plains ecozone.387 This region is an
important breeding habitat for 22 to 170 million resident birds and
an important flyway for wetland-dependent birds.388 It is also one
of the world’s most important breeding areas for migratory birds,
with 1 to 3 billion individual birds from at least 300 species known to
regularly breed there.389 Approximately 30 percent of all shorebirds
(7 million) and 30 percent of all land birds (1 to 3 billion) that
breed in the United States and Canada do so within the Boreal.390
Approximately 94 percent of individual birds migrate out of the Boreal
area after breeding.391 Birds in the United States would be taken as
well, in violation of the MBTA.  Construction of the pipeline would
likely result in both direct mortalities to migratory birds through
collision with vehicles, nest disturbances and destruction and other
impacts, and indirect fatalities through increases in predation
opportunities and habitat disturbance.  d.

Approval of the Project Would Be Arbitrary and Capricious Under the
Administrative Procedure Act Because the Project Will Be In Violation
of the Fish and Wildlife Coordination Act

As outlined above, it is a violation of the APA for an agency action to
not be in accordance with the law. The Fish and Wildlife Coordination
Act provides the following: 384

16 U.S.C. § 703(a).  DEIS at 3.6.1.4-13.  386 Bruno, Kenny,
Corporate Ethics International; Bruce Baizel, EARTHWORKS; Susan
CaseyLefkowitz, Natural Resources Defense Council; Kate Colarulli,
Sierra Club, Tar Sands Invasion: How Dirty and Expensive Oil from
Canada Threatens America’s New Energy Economy at 7 (May 2010),
attached as Exhibit 38, citing Jeff Wells, Susan Casey-Lefkowitz,
Gabriela Chavarria, Simon Dyer, Danger in the Nursery: Impact
on Birds of Tar Sands Oil Development in Canada’s Boreal
Forest, Natural Resources Defense Council (2008), available at
http://www.nrdc.org/wildlife/borealbirds.asp (last visited June
29, 2010) and attached as Exhibit 107.  387 Wells, supra note 304,
at 1.  388 Wells, supra note 304, at 1 389 See, e.g., P. Blancher,
and J.V. Wells, The Boreal Forest Region: North America’s Bird
Nursery. Boreal Songbird Initiative, Canadian Boreal Initiative, and
Bird Studies Canada (2005), attached as Exhibit 122.  390 Wells, supra
note 304, at 1, citing P. Blancher, and J.V. Wells, The Boreal Forest
Region: North America’s Bird Nursery. Boreal Songbird Initiative,
Canadian Boreal Initiative, and Bird Studies Canada (2005), attached as
Exhibit 122.  391 Wells, supra note 304, at 3, citing E. Butterworth,
A. Leach, M. Gendron, and G.R. Stewart, Peace-Athabasca Delta Waterbird
Inventory Program: 1998-2001, Final Report, Ducks Unlimited Canada,
Edmonton, Alberta (2002), attached as Exhibit 123.  385

[W]henever the waters of any stream or other body of water are
proposed or authorized to be impounded, diverted, the channel deepened,
or the stream or other body of water otherwise controlled or modified
for any purpose whatever, including navigation and drainage, by any
department or agency of the United States, or by any public or private
agency under Federal permit or license, such department or agency
first shall consult with the United States Fish and Wildlife Service,
Department of the Interior, and with the head of the agency exercising
administration over the wildlife resources of the particular State
wherein the impoundment, diversion, or other control facility is to be
constructed, with a view to the conservation of wildlife resources by
preventing loss of and damage to such resources as well as providing
for the development and improvement thereof in connection with such
water-resource development.392 The specific reports and recommendations
of the Secretary and the state agency on the wildlife aspects of such
projects must be made part of the responsible federal agency’s
report.393 It is intended that the reports and recommendations be
based on surveys and investigations to determine possible damage to
wildlife resources and measures that should be adopted to prevent
that loss or damage.394 Federal agencies must give full consideration
to the reports.395 This has not occurred.  This pipeline proposes to
cross a total of 341 perennial waterbodies396 and 621 intermittent
waterbodies.397 Although there is a section of the DEIS which accedes
that wetlands will be crossed, it does not specify quantity, locations,
or the length of pipeline which will invade the wetland area.398 F.

The DEIS does not adequately address the destruction of irreplaceable
native grassland ecosystems and Impacts on the Sand Hills.

Although the DEIS acknowledges that “conservation of native prairie
remnants is a high priority throughout the project area” and that
the Sand Hills are “one of the few remaining 392

16 U.S.C. § 662(a).  16 U.S.C. § 662(b).  394 16 U.S.C. § 662(b)
(“The reporting officers in project reports of the Federal agencies
shall give full consideration to the report and recommendations of
the Secretary of the Interior and to any report of the State agency
on the wildlife aspects of such projects, and the project plan shall
include such justifiable means and measures for wildlife purposes as
the reporting agency finds should be adopted to obtain maximum overall
project benefits.”) (emphasis added).  395 16 U.S.C. § 662(b).
396 DEIS at 2-27.  397 DEIS at 2-30.  398 DEIS at 2-31 – 32.  393

examples of a functioning prairie ecosystem,” the Pipeline route
will cross over 336 miles of native grasslands that may take a century
or more to recover from the excavation. These are irreplaceable
resources of national and international value that cannot simply be
replanted.  In recent years increasing amounts of scarce remaining
native grasslands have been plowed under to meet agricultural
needs. The native prairie remnants on the High Plains and Great
Plains are biologically unique, contain high biological diversity, and
provide critical ecosystem services to the region, including carbon
sequestration. Pipeline construction and operation will permanently
alter this ecosystem by causing increased soil erosion, introduction
and expansion of noxious weed populations, long-term damage to delicate
soils, alteration of vegetation due to increased soil temperatures,
and a risk of minor to catastrophic spills along the full Pipeline
route.399 Proposed mitigation measures are inadequate to protect these
delicate ecosystems.  Stockpiling topsoil to a depth of 12 inches will
not preserve native grasses whose root systems may extend many feet
below the surface, nor will it preserve Sand Hill areas where there
is no topsoil. In addition, many mitigation measures are proposed
only for agricultural and residential areas, apparently leaving
delicate grasslands exempted. At a minimum, all mitigation measures
should apply to grassland and prairie ecosystems and be formalized
as enforceable permit conditions.  There are certain specific errors
and omissions in the DEIS discussion of native grassland ecosystems
and the Sand Hills. Dr. James Stubbendieck, Director of the Center
for Great Plains Studies at the University of Nebraska at Lincoln,
assisted us by reviewing the DEIS sections related to these areas. His
comments are incorporated into the discussion below.  1.

DEIS Underestimates Significance of Native Grassland Excavation

In Section 3.5.2 (under Terrestrial Vegetation), the first sentence is
inaccurate with regard to the degree of alteration “by agriculture,
urban, industrial development…prairie dogs”.400 It is inaccurate to
say that native vegetation communities “throughout” the project
area have been so altered. Some of these areas have been altered
very little. Their excavation would represent, in some cases, the
first alteration by human hands. Section 3.5.2 includes other factual
errors. For example, grasses are either bunch grasses or sodforming,
not both.401 The discussion of “Traditionally Used Native Plants”
at Section 3.5.2.4 requires updating and/or additions to scientific
names. It should also be stated regarding the Sand Hills that most
of the lakes in this region represent the water table.402 The risk of
aquifer contamination is therefore exceptionally high in this area.  2.

DEIS Fails to Consider Fully the Risk of Noxious Weed Introduction

DEIS at 3.5.5.  DEIS at 3.5.2.  401 DEIS at 3.5.2.1.  402 DEIS
at 3.5.2.1.  400

Table 3.5.5-4 (Noxious Weed Sources Occurring Along the Steele City
Segment of the Project) underestimates the noxious weed species active
in Nebraska. The DEIS does not reflect the fact that noxious weeds
‘Sericea [Chinese] lespedeza’ and Johnsongrass grow in Nebraska.
Table 3.5.4-1 (Federal, State, or Local Noxious Weeds Potentially
Occurring Along the Project Route) has omissions and should be revised
with the assistance of a specialist in affected prairie ecosystems.
Section 3.5.5.1 does not address the fact that increasing soil
temperature might allow for southern plants to move northward. An
additional concern is that the newly created microclimate may allow
invasion of new noxious weeds. Research on soil temperatures increases
(Appendix L) extensively cites an article, Dunn et al., that is
unpublished. Since it has not gone through a scientific peer review
process, the Dunn article should neither be used nor cited in the
document. Other cited research is primarily related to crops, and the
only article on the impact of native grass species involves a natural
gas pipeline installed 17 years ago.  Further research needs to be
done to determine if more relevant and newer peer-reviewed research
exists that can provide a stronger basis for decision-making. The
small section regarding revegetation monitoring (Appendix L, section
v.) discusses a CRP field re-established after a crude oil pipeline was
installed, but again the research is not in a peer-reviewed journal
and was conducted by a paid environmental service firm. The 20-50%
increase in temperature they quote from the Knapp article is not
a correct conclusion from the article. It is an overstatement. The
Knapp article is attached to these comments as an exhibit.  3.

The DEIS Plans Inadequately for Revegetation

At several points, the DEIS makes faulty assumptions, proposes
insufficient measures, or is unclear about revegetation planning for
highly sensitive areas. For example, one growing season of discouraging
livestock grazing will be inadequate for establishment. Establishment
will likely take five to ten years.403 The recommendation by regulatory
agencies on prohibiting burning also is not clear.404 The DEIS is
unclear on whether local ecotypes will be used for seed mixes in
replanting and offers no supporting evidence for the assertion that the
reseeding plan will restore the biodiversity that will be destroyed by
the construction process.405 Dr.  Stubbendieck believes it will not.
Recovery time projected for “Vegetation Communities of Concern”
is inadequate.406 It is not clear if prairie dog burrows will be
encouraged or even allowed on the ROW postconstruction. The DEIS does
not clarify whether the predicted sagebrush re-establishment time
is related to re-planting or natural colonizing. Monitoring in the
recovery phase must last longer than just one year, and evaluation
of revegetation success by “visual survey” is inadequate.407 A
sampling technique should be developed that requires more quantitative
figures versus the 403

DEIS at 3.5-34, last bullet point.  DEIS at 3.5-32, 4th bullet point.
405 DEIS at 3.5-33, 3rd bullet point from the bottom.  406 DEIS
at 3.5.5.2.  407 DEIS at 3.5-36.  404

proposed qualitative method. For example, a system evaluating
percent cover or botanical composition of each species should
be employed.  For the Sand Hills region, certain specifics are
lacking or inappropriate to the unique soil conditions. There is
little topsoil development in this area, so stockpiling it would be
of little value on the uplands.408 Revegetation methods specific
to the Sand Hills are inadequate. Some are untested in the region
(such as imprinting the soil). Wind erosion is a major concern that
remains unaddressed. Fencing would also be needed to remove animal
traffic in these areas.  The sixth bullet point in Section 3.5.5
fails to discuss the impact of increased soil temperatures on the soil
microbial community or the impact on native vegetation. Section 3.5.5.1
(General Vegetation Resources paragraph) misrepresents the length
of time it will take for vegetation to establish to preconstruction
conditions. Studies have shown a much longer reestablishment period,
for example, 20-40 years in the shortgrass prairie, but less time for
Sand Hills or tallgrass prairies. In Section 3.5.5.1, it is unclear
whether the time period for shrubland re-establishment would be if the
shrubs were re-introduced or natural colonization was allowed to occur.
Finally, we note that Section 3.8 (Threatened and Endangered Species)
omits consideration of the federally endangered Blowout Penstemon
(Penstemon haydenii) population in Rock County, Nebraska.  G.

The DEIS does not Adequately Address the Risks and Impacts of Spills
and Operational Leaks.

The Pipeline raises environmental and public safety issues distinct
from those associated with conventional crude oil pipeline systems. The
DEIS does not adequately address these unique concerns, including
pipeline routing, pipe quality, construction standards, operation and
maintenance, and emergency response. We request that DOS condition
the grant of the Permit on a requirement that the fifty-one special
permit conditions imposed on the original Keystone pipeline by PHMSA
be imposed on the full length of the Keystone XL project as well. We
further request that DOS condition the grant of the Permit on the
use of the thicker pipe proposed only for High Consequence Areas on
the full length of the Pipeline. Using a design factor and operating
stress level of 80 percent of the steel pipe’s specified minimum
yield strength (“SMYS”) in rural areas, in addition to thicker
pipe, will provide the maximum level of safety over the lifecycle of
this pipeline. The devastating consequences of a pipeline failure to
agricultural, wildlife, cultural and other resources along the route
should dictate the application of the highest possible standards for
the length of the Pipeline.  Lastly, as discussed in subsection 6,
Operations and Maintenance Items, because of the higher temperature
at which this pipeline will operate, internal and external corrosion
will be a major risk. Given the advanced state of various corrosion
mitigation technologies such as recent developments in fusion bonded
epoxy (“FBE”) coatings, improvements in cathodic protection
design and operation, and requirements for cleaning pigs and corrosion
inspection with high 408

DEIS at 3.5-36 and 3.5-37.  111

resolution smart pigs, we request that DOS expand its conditions
for corrosion mitigation to include all of the above.  The unique
nature of the oil being moved plays an important role in the design,
operation, and maintenance of the Keystone XL system as well as the
effectiveness of oil spill response, so a brief discussion of several
important tar sands oil characteristics is warranted.  1.

Tar sands oil and synthetic crude

The bitumen oil produced from tar sands is not typical crude oil. This
oil is very heavy with a gravity that can range from 7 to 13 ºAPI,
which is very close to the gravity of water of 10 ºAPI. The bitumen
is very thick or viscous at normal temperatures and either must be
heated or blended with various lighter oil stocks, such as condensate
or gas oil “cutter” stocks, to permit the blended mixture to flow
under pipeline design conditions. While not addressed in the DEIS,
the published tariffs for the Keystone project (which has the same
pipeline origination point, the Hardesty Terminal in Alberta, Canada),
places an upper viscosity limit (as a function of varying temperature
over the year), and lower gravity quality specifications for any oil
entering this pipeline system to assure that the pipeline stays within
its designed operating parameters, with warmer months of the year
permitting higher viscosity, thicker blends, of bitumen.409 Certain
limited refinery capacity in Alberta has been designed to upgrade
tar sand bitumen (7 to 13 °API) via some form of resid cracking
(usually delayed coker, flexcoker, or resid hydrocracking), and major
hydrocracking and hydrotreating (adds large amounts of hydrogen)
to produce a much lighter (approximately 32 °API) and fuller range
(depending on the amount of refinery processing) crude oil. This oil is
labeled “synthetic crude oil” to distinguish it from conventional
crude oil. Since the refinery capacity in Alberta is limited compared
to the tar sand field production, the Keystone pipelines have been
designed to move both blended bitumen (approximately 19 °API) and
synthetic crude oil (approximately 32 °API) to both PADD II and PADD
III refineries in batches down the pipeline, with the blended bitumen
streams comprising the major share of the pipeline capacity.  2.

Identifying sensitive areas

Federal regulations identify certain areas, such as populated areas,
that can be affected by pipeline releases as HCAs.410 Keystone XL
has asked to increase design factors to 0.8, allowing thinner pipe,
in special permit rural areas that are not located in HCAs. The
approximate location of HCAs and special permit areas along the
pipeline should be identified in a pipeline route map that should
be included in the EIS.It is very important that the public knows
and understands that the HCAs and special permit areas designated
are proper and this understanding can best be conveyed with a map
showing the approximate locations of these 409

Keystone Pipeline Application, Section 6: System Design, page 9, and
F.E.R.C. No 1 for TransCanada Keystone Pipeline Local Pipeline Tariff,
Containing Rules and Regulations Applying to the Transportation of
Petroleum – From the International Boundary with Canada at or near
Haskett, Manitoba to Points in Illinois, issued April 15, 2010.  410 49
CFR §195.450 Definitions, “High consequence area means:…”.  112

areas along a pipeline.  3.

Pipeline routing issues

Various critical issues concerning the Keystone XL pipeline’s
specific route selection in the DEIS need further clarification and
evaluation. Steep unstable slopes are insufficiently analyzed and
avoided. Table 3.1.4-2 identifies areas of the proposed pipeline
route that are “Areas with High Landslide Potential Crossed by the
Project.” 411 The impression that this table gives is that there
are over 360 miles of pipeline routed in areas with high landslide
potential.  No pipeline is capable of withstanding the forces of
many tons associated with a massive landslide. The DEIS states that
“Keystone has considered landslide potential in its routing work and
has selected crossings of these areas where the landslide potential
is considered minimal.” 412 Further detail is warranted to put this
concern to rest given that landslide related failure usually end up as
pipeline ruptures, with very large, high rate releases. Table 3.1.4-2
needs to be expanded in further detail to identify those areas of the
pipeline route where steep landslide would be of the “breakaway”
type rather than slight or limited earth movement or settlement.
Pipelines are usually designed to handle slight earth movement
or settlement. A pipeline elevation profile should quickly help in
determining breakaway landslide potential in those areas identified as
steep unstable slopes. Breakaway landslides place rapid and excessive
abnormal loading forces on the pipeline. Pipelines placed in breakaway
landslide areas need to be routed out of these landslide areas.  4.

Pipe quality and high strength grade X-70 and X-80 pipe steels

While not specifically addressed in the DEIS, further comment in this
important area is warranted given that the Keystone XL pipeline will
be constructed of X-70 and/or X-80 grade pipe.413 Following several
recent major pipeline construction projects, PHMSA issued an Advisory
Bulletin, ADB-09-01, warning that batches of higher strength recently
manufactured pipe (i.e., grade X-70, and X-80) involved on several
major pipeline projects failed to make grade specifications in several
areas.414 Because of low or sub-quality manufactured pipe, pipe grades
X-70 and X-80 have been experiencing either pipe failure or permanent
expansion yielding during the special high stress hydrotest. This
special hydrotest sets a minimum hydrotest pressure of 100% SMYS
before operating at a 0.8 design factor (80% SMYS).  Following this
Advisory Bulletin, Plains Justice, representing various other public
parties as well, also requested under the Freedom of Information Act
(“FOIA”) further information related to the hydrotest failures,
and results and records related to the pipelines and pipe grades
mentioned in the Advisory Bulletin.415 Review of these FOIA-supplied
files leads to several 411

DEIS at 3.1-19.  DEIS at 3.13-38.  413 DEIS at 2-17.  414 PHMSA
Advisory Bulletin ADB-09-01, “Pipeline Safety: Potential Low
and Variable Yield and Tensile Strength and Chemical Composition
Properties in High Strength Line Pipe“, attached as Exhibit 124.
415 Plains Justice letter to Marilyn Burke, US DOT PHMSA FOIA Officer,
“RE Freedom of Information Act Request – Information Related to
Advisory Bulletin ADB-09-01 Potential Low 412

observations related to this issue.  Properly specified and
manufactured pipe should not permanently yield during an appropriate
high pressure hydrotest, even one calling for a minimum pressure
test of 100% SMYS required for increasing the design factor to 0.8
(normal maximum design factor is 0.72 calling for a minimum 90%
SMYS hydrotest pressure, and results in thicker pipe at the same
design pressure). Steel pipe that has yielded to some limited upper
value may not be unsafe, but such lower quality pipe segments,
if left in the pipeline (obviously for pipe that has not failed
during the hydrotest), must be evaluated at their actual realized
lower value properties, not the properties ordered or specified for
the pipe. It is critical that future anomaly evaluations for these
specific lower quality pipe segments utilize the values reflective
of the poorer quality of that pipe segment, or the segment should be
replaced with solid quality pipe.  The fact that sections of pipe
are exhibiting some permanent deformation raises serious questions
about the completeness or adequacy of current federal regulations,
industry quality specifications, and pipe verification sampling during
the manufacture of higher stress grade steel pipe.  5.

Construction-related issues

The U.S., in recent years, has undergone an unusual
expansion/construction phase in the number of miles of transmission
pipeline constructed, and both the Keystone and Keystone XL
projects are contributing to a serious demand on experienced pipeline
construction and inspection resources. Along with the Advisory Bulletin
ADB-09-01 mentioned earlier uncovering the appearance of lower yield
pipe than specified, PHMSA’s investigation of thirty-five recent
major pipeline construction projects has also uncovered many areas
of concern related to pipeline construction activities.416 Given the
many problems encountered, PHMSA called a new pipeline construction
workshop in Fort Worth, Texas on April 23, 2009 to discuss the many
field observations from recent construction inspections.417 Part of
this increased construction inspection activity is related to many
projects seeking to increase the design factor to 0.8 permitting
thinner pipe wall, provided many additional quality improvements and
quality controls are undertaken and occur. Given the decreased margin
of error in such pipeline projects, the most stringent quality controls
are necessary.  PHMSA, in granting the special permit for the original
Keystone project, exceeded current federal pipeline safety regulations
by requiring that “All girth welds must be NDE by radiography or
alternative means.” 418 This special permit requirement for the
Keystone Pipeline project exceeds that stated in the Keystone XL DEIS,
“All girth welds must be inspected, repaired, and non-destructively
examined in accordance with §§195.228, 195.230 and

and Variable Yield and Tensile Strength and Chemical Composition
Properties in High Strength Line Pipe,” dated September
2, 2009, attached as Exhibit 125.  416 See PHMSA web site
http://primis.phmsa.dot.gov/construction/index.htm (last visited
June 29, 2010), attached as Exhibit 126.  417 74 Fed. Reg. 13,309
(March 6, 2009).  418 PHMSA Special Permit for Keystone Pipeline,
at 7, attached as Exhibit 127.  114

195.234.” 419 Since these DEIS referenced sections of the federal
regulations do not require important quality verification via
radiological (or ultrasonic) inspection of all liquid pipeline girth
welds, it is critical that there be no misunderstanding that all girth
welds in the special permit sections must be so inspected. It is also
unclear if girth weld non-destructive testing means inspection by
radiograph or ultrasonic testing, and if such inspection will also
occur in non special permit areas (i.e., HCAs). Many companies and
other countries (including Canada) now incorporate this important
construction quality inspection on all their transmission pipeline
girth welds and require such important records to be maintained
for the life of the pipeline. It is also unclear from the DEIS if
all girth weld radiological or ultrasonic inspection records are to
be maintained for the life of the pipeline. This should be a simple
matter to clarify.  For example, federal pipeline safety regulations
do not require that all girth welds that join pipeline segments be
radiologically or ultrasonically inspected, even segments in HCAs.420
Prudent pipeline operators constructing new pipeline exceed current
federal safety minimums, and provide such high tech inspections
to assure the quality of all girth welds. Smart pigging currently
cannot inspect girth welds to the level of detail or quality as
that of radiologically or ultrasonically inspection. Such girth
weld radiologically or ultrasonically inspection records should
be maintained for the life of the pipeline as is required in many
other countries.  6.

Operation and maintenance items a.

Temperature

Given the amount of energy driving the electric pumps and the viscosity
of the oil, the oil temperature in the pipeline will increase and range
from approximately 100ºF to 140ºF, depending on the pipeline’s
throughput and the season of the year.421 PHMSA has placed a 150ºF
maximum temperature limit on the Keystone pipeline for various
technical reasons, and this restriction should also be placed on the
Keystone XL pipeline.422 The increase in temperature as the crude
oil flows down the pipeline increases the energy efficiency of the
pipeline as the oil thins with higher temperature, making it easier
to flow down the pipeline.  Temperature increase, however, markedly
raises the risks of corrosion attack (both internal and external)
to the pipeline. Corrosion will be a bona fide risk of concern for
this system, well beyond that for a normal liquid pipeline operating
at much lower temperatures. Technology has sufficiently advanced to
substantially mitigate various forms of corrosion attack if various
corrosion mitigation practices are prudently applied in the operation
and maintenance of the pipeline. We highly caution not to overly rely
on corrosion inhibitor or corrosion coupons to prevent or control the
risk of internal corrosion on this system. Cleaning pigs and prudent
runs of high resolution smart pigs provide an important safety net
in monitoring various forms of corrosion. It is also important to
note that PHMSA has required an import safety net for special permit
areas in requiring that general corrosion with predicted metal loss
greater than 40% wall 419

DEIS at 2-41.  49 CFR §195.234 (Welds: Nondestructive testing).
421 DEIS at App. L, “Pipeline Temperature Effects Study.” 422 PHMSA
Special Permit for Keystone Pipeline, at 6, Exhibit 127. “Temperature
Control: The pipeline operating temperature must be less than 150
degrees Fahrenheit.” 420

thickness be repaired within 180 days.423 Pipe in HCAs only has to
be repaired within 180 days if general corrosion loss exceeds 50%
of nominal wall.424 b.

Overpressure protection

Federal pipeline safety regulation concerning maximum operating
pressure (“MOP”) indicates that “No operator may permit the
pressure in a pipeline during surges or other variations from normal
operation to exceed 110 percent of the operating pressure limit
established . . . .” 425 PHMSA has reinforced this overpressure
requirement in the special permit conditions.426 The regulations are
moot about how to prevent such overpressure and it is not illegal to
exceed 110% MOP provided the pipeline doesn’t fail.427 Exceeding
110% MOP that results in a release from the pipeline may lead to
criminal prosecution in the U.S. Overpressure protection design
and effectiveness should be taken very seriously, especially for
this liquid pipeline system, given several unique characteristics
associated with this pipeline such as bitumen, horsepower, and batching
operation. SCADA operation and design can play an important role
in preventing overpressure events. SCADA operation and control room
intervention, even fast scan SCADA systems, however, should never be
relied on to provide failsafe overpressure protection. Given that an
overpressure event in excess of 110% MOP could indicate a serious
systemic problem, we request a permit condition that all events
in excess of 110% MOP be reported to PHMSA within 24 hours of the
event, even if there is no release.  The primary tool for analyzing
potential overpressure in liquid pipelines is a prudent surge analysis
that reflects the design and operation that actually occurs in the
field. The DEIS indicates “and if needed to conduct surge analysis to
determine pipeline segments that may have experienced an overpressure
condition.” Subparagraph a of this DEIS section further goes on
to say, “A surge analysis showing how the pipeline special permit
segment(s) would be operated to be consistent with these conditions
is required prior to operating at the alternative MOP. This author
advises that on this pipeline system a prudent surge analysis is very
important prior to startup, as surge overpressure can be created by
more than an inadvertent mainline valve closure.  The project should
be able to demonstrate the method and basic engineering approach to
failsafe, preventing overpressure on the mainline system.428 Failsafe
design should rely on field installed 423

PHMSA Special Permit for Keystone Pipeline, at 13, Exhibit 127. Anomaly
Evaluation and Repair.  424 49 CFR § 195.452(h)(4)(iii)(E),
“Pipeline integrity management in high consequence areas, Special
requirements for scheduling remediation, 180-day conditions.” 425 49
CFR § 195.406(b).  426 PHMSA Special Permit for Keystone Pipeline, at
6, Exhibit 127. “Overpressure Protection Control: Mainline pipeline
overpressure protection must be limited to a maximum of 110 percent
MOP consistent with 49 CFR§195.406(b).  427 See 49 CFR § 191.23(4)
reporting safety-related conditions and the exclusion that avoids
reporting such overpressure events in excess of 110% MOP that might
identify possible pipeline systemic problems to PHMSA.  428 See Richard
B. Kuprewicz, “Preventing Pipeline Releases,” dated July 22, 2003,
prepared for the Washington City and County Pipeline Safety Consortium,
for examples of why SCADA should not be counted as a failsafe device,
especially as it relates to preventing overpressure.  116

equipment and not rely on SCADA as the last line of defense to
prevent overpressure in excess of 110% MOP.  c.

Backup power requirement for failsafe equipment

From the DEIS there is no backup power to the mainline electric
motors and this is not necessarily a problem. There appears to be
a backup system of the SCADA operation and certain MLVs. The DEIS
is not clear if other safety related equipment, such as critical
core communication or tank level monitoring, has an adequate and
independent electric power supply that will assure safe pipeline
operation is maintained, especially during an upset associated with
an electric power loss.  It is also worth noting that because of the
ability for PHMSA to impose additional requirements as a result of the
special permit request, PHMSA had added requirements on the Keystone
pipeline system incorporating additional SCADA requirements related
to National Transportation Safety Board (“NTSB”) pipeline safety
investigations and recommendations that have recently been codified
into federal pipeline safety regulations.429 These improvements
increase the effectiveness of the SCADA, its presentation and alarm
system, and incorporate control room management practices that increase
the proficiency and the efficiency of the important control room
operators remotely overseeing and operating the pipeline system.  d.

Operation and maintenance manpower

The DEIS indicates that operation and maintenance of the pipeline would
typically be accomplished by Keystone personnel and only about twenty
U.S. employees will comprise a permanent operational workforce.430
Note that this number does not include Operations Control Center
personnel as the control room (and SCADA) for the pipeline operation
is in Calgary, Canada. While the DEIS is moot about the number of
contract employees that will also assist the pipeline operator in
certain operation, maintenance, and oil spill response activities,
twenty employees sounds like a very small number to cover a 24/7
pipeline operation of approximately 1,700 miles of 36-inch pipe,
32 pump stations with multiple pumps (even though electric drivers
simplify the pump station complexity), 74 main line valves, a tank
farm, metering equipment, cathodic protection systems, and assorted
telecommunication and monitoring as well as safety equipment, that
have to be periodically inspected, calibrated and tested, as well as
cover round the clock 24/7 response to operating needs or demands. In
fairness to the operator, this low number may reflect a reliance on
contract personnel to perform many less critical operational and
maintenance activities associated with maintaining the safety of
the pipeline. A more detailed review of the work tasks, work load,
and requirements, while under the discretion of the pipeline operator,
is warranted to assure adequate coverage of maintenance and operational
core activities.  e.

Emergency response plan or oil spill response

DEIS at 2.4.3.2; SCADA and PHMSA-2207-27954, Pipeline Safety: Control
Room Management/Human Factors Final Rule, effective date April 14,
2009. Attached as Exhibit 128.  430 DEIS at 2-42.  117

PHMSA’s approval of the Keystone XL Pipeline Emergency Response
Plan is a major federal action subject to NEPA.431 Although many
of the pipeline safety standards in federal law are written as
performance standards, PHMSA has discretion to determine whether the
means of compliance chosen by a pipeline company satisfies federal
law given the size, location, and type of the specific pipeline at
issue. Further, PHMSA has authority to require changes in emergency
response plans that fail to meet minimum federal standards, either
with regard to the sufficiency of the planning approach or the
amount and location of spill response personnel and equipment.
PHMSA may and has required pipeline companies to revise plans so
that they comply with broad federal performance standards. PHMSA’s
hands are not tied.  Since federal law requires only that emergency
response plans be approved before operation, without specifying how
long before operation approval is required and without prohibiting or
specifying any particular review procedures, it is entirely possible
for PHMSA to comply with both the requirements of federal pipeline
law and NEPA. DOS’s failure to include a draft Emergency Response
Plan means that Draft EIS provides no opportunity to comment on this
critical issue. Instead, the Draft EIS presents merely a general
description of federal emergency response planning law, with no
details about how the federal government will protect citizen and
the environment from the Keystone XL Pipeline.  PHMSA actions under
federal pipeline law are subject to NEPA in part because federal
pipeline law preempts state and local pipeline safety requirements,
with the result that PHMSA actions are the exclusive form of mitigation
for impacts related to oil spills from this pipeline.  Absent full
review of Emergency Response Plan alternatives related to, for example,
amount of spill response equipment, number of spill response personnel,
location of spill response personnel and equipment, alternative spill
response strategies, time for response, worst-case spill scenarios,
and mitigation options, the Draft EIS will not consider meaningful
alternatives and mitigation related to the primary risk posed by
the pipeline to citizens and the environment, namely oil spills.
Absent consideration of a Keystone XL Pipeline Emergency Response
Plan through this NEPA review, citizens will have no opportunity to
comment on the sufficiency of federal actions intended to protect
them from oil spills from this pipeline.  Given several references in
the DEIS, additional details about emergency response planning are
needed because of the unusual properties of blended bitumen and the
temperatures at which the pipeline will be operating that can make
oil recovery process and equipment needs 431

Spiller v. Walker, 1998 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 18341, *48 (W.D. TX). In its
review of PHMSA’s review of a change in product and direction of flow
of an existing pipeline, the Western District of Texas stated, “The
Court concludes . . . that DOT's extensive and intricate oversight and
approval of the Longhorn Pipeline's safety and emergency-response plan
constitutes major Federal action significantly affecting the human
environment.” Subsequent appellate review of this matter did not
reconsider the Department of Transportation’s obligation to comply
with NEPA when approving emergency response plans. Spiller v. White,
352 F.3d 235 (5th Cir.  2003).  118

substantially different than that for more conventional lighter
crude oil blends.  An oil spill plan should categorize and address
releases as small rate leak releases, both those that reach the
surface and those that flow underground, especially those that
can threaten aquifers, and then address the oil spill recovery
and mitigation plans, including mitigation/recovery techniques for
such smaller releases. A separate section related to releases that
can enter aquifers is a must as the response and mitigation will
be entirely different than that for surface releases. Oil spill
response plans must also address large rate, high mass releases,
associated with pipeline ruptures that usually reach the surface,
but can also be a threat to nearby aquifers. Federal pipeline safety
regulations require that an ERP be capable of dealing with a worst
case release, or rupture.432 Certain core information related to oil
spill response plans must be made public to assure that such plans
can be implemented in a timely manner and be effective for this
unique material.  One core document that is important in evaluating
whether an ERP will be effective on a particular pipeline, is an
elevation profile of the pipeline showing the approximate location
of mainline valves including check valves. An elevation profile is
especially important in judging the soundness of an ERP when it comes
to a large high rate release associated with pipeline ruptures. The
elevation profile is much less effective in evaluating the ERP when it
comes to leaks. An elevation profile indicating the location of the
mainline valves, including check valves, and their mode of operation
will also help determine and confirm if the placement of such valves,
especially check valves, is appropriate. Some highly sensitive areas
warrant remote operated mainline valves, other than check valves,
given the possible severe consequences in the event of a release.  7.

Impacts of Oil Spills and Operational Leaks on Soils and Water Quality

According to section 3.3.1.1 of the Draft EIS, the proposed route
for the Keystone Pipeline Project passes directly over a number
of shallow aquifers in the eastern Dakotas and Nebraska. Many of
these shallow aquifers along the proposed pipeline route are close
enough to the surface to be directly replenished by rainfall and
hydraulically connected to surface waters.  This means that any
leak or spill from the pipeline has the potential to contaminate
these underlying aquifers, and unlike surface waters, they cannot
be directly accessed for the purpose of clean-up and mitigation
measures. Many rural residents and rural communities rely on both
private and public wells that draw potable water from these shallow
aquifers. In addition, rural residents actively engaged in production
agriculture are likely to have irrigation systems and livestock that
also depend on these shallow aquifers as a primary water source. The
Draft EIS does not adequately address the full range of consequences
that would result from a catastrophic leak or spill along the pipeline
that occurs over an underlying shallow aquifer.

49 CFR § 194.119 (Part 194 – Response Plans for Onshore Oil
Pipelines, Submission and approval procedures); 49 CFR § 194.105
(Worst case discharge).

At section 5.3.1, the Draft EIS concludes that “[m]any of the
aquifers present beneath, or in the vicinity of, the proposed route
are isolated by the presence of glacial till,” which would offer
a measure of protection from contamination. For those near-surface
aquifers that do not have this overlying layer of protection, the
Draft EIS notes that “measures have been proposed … to reduce
the potential impact of leaks and spills during construction.”
(emphasis added) The Draft EIS does not address what measures would be
implemented to protect these aquifers during the operation lifetime
of the pipeline. What, for example, would be the proposed mitigation
measures if the sole available drinking water supply for several
rural municipalities and surrounding farmsteads is contaminated by a
spill from the pipeline? What contaminants would be released into the
groundwater in the event of such a spill? What would be the likely
duration of such contamination? If a spill from the pipeline could
permanently contaminate a shallow aquifer that rural residents rely on
for their potable water, is it appropriate to route the pipeline over
such aquifers, or are there viable alternatives? The Draft EIS does
not address these issues, which are vital to the health and livelihood
of the rural residents who depend on these aquifers as their sole
source of potable water. The final EIS should more thoroughly examine
the risk to shallow aquifers posed by the Keystone Pipeline Project.
Water is a priceless resource in the region to be traversed by the
Pipeline. The DEIS indicates in many segments of the report that the
Pipeline will not cross any sole-source aquifers.  We question the
correctness of these statements and request further documentation
of affected aquifers. There are many factors that must be considered
should a pipeline release affect an aquifer. Pipeline approval must
be conditioned on the exercise of all due precautions.  For example,
the aquifer’s proximity and permeability near the Pipeline is very
important because this can affect how quickly a pipeline release can
migrate to or within an aquifer. The underground migration pattern of
a Pipeline release may be slow for some leaks (slower rate releases)
as the oil quickly thickens at environmental conditions. While this
thickness may be a blessing in preventing rapid underground migration
and possible aquifer contamination, it may also render tremendously
difficult removing such a spill within an aquifer. Oil spill response
plans (or ERPs) should identify how a specific aquifer will be
protected and how contamination will be addressed. This is especially
important to avoid serious contamination of critical aquifers such
as the Ogallala Aquifer that plays a very important water supply role
along parts of the Pipeline route. Remediation could include actually
digging up soil contaminated with the very thick bitumen blends in the
event various other remediation approaches are ineffective.  There is a
specific type of aquifer, called a karst aquifer, that usually merits
special attention given its unique characteristics. Considerable
discussion is presented in the DEIS related to the pipeline and
the exposure to subsidence to the pipeline in karsts. While federal
pipeline safety regulations require the pipeline operator to consider
abnormal load threats such as that from subsidence, the more critical
issue is the threat that the pipeline has to the karst aquifer as a
water source. Karst aquifers consist mainly of water flow structures
that can cause released oil in such an environment to more rapidly
move through the aquifer. The fracture structure of a karst aquifer
makes oil removal, especially the heavier oil moved by the Pipeline,
extremely difficult, if not impossible, to remove. Regarding Pipeline
routing, special precautions should be exercised in karst aquifers
and any aquifers that may have rapid migration phenomena in the event
a Pipeline oil release can reach such structures, especially if these
aquifers are sole sources

of water. Pipelines that can affect sole source aquifers, especially
karst-like aquifers, are identified as unusually sensitive areas
marked for special pipeline integrity management protocols in federal
pipeline safety regulation covering HCAs.  Table 3.1.4-3 in the DEIS
lists approximately fifty miles of the pipeline that cross karst
aquifers as identified by national scale karst maps. The DEIS goes on
to state “Keystone would consult with the respective state geological
survey departments to identify the most up-to-date sources of data
on karst-related subsidence hazards along the proposed route.”
DEIS at 3.1-20.  We request that such karst aquifers be screened as
to their potential to be impacted by an oil spill (leak or rupture)
from the Pipeline. If such an analysis finds the pipeline to be a
serious threat, the pipeline should be routed out of the karst risk
area, or effective pipeline mitigation efforts incurred to prevent
contamination from the pipeline.  These comments are equally true
for impacts to soils, whose unique biological significance at many
points along the route is discussed in Section IV.B above. We request
a separate analysis of risks and impacts to agricultural and native
soils, native biota, and productive capacity.  H.

The DEIS Fails to Address the Environmental Consequences of Abandonment
and Mitigation Thereof.

Abandoned pipelines create significant risks of adverse impacts to
the human and natural environment. As abandoned pipelines corrode
they may form sink holes, drain water between properties resulting
in a loss of wetlands and soil productivity or loss of farm land to
flooding, redirect stream flows, emerge from the surface especially
in highly erodible lands, and create hazards for individuals,
vehicles, and livestock, and interfere with subsequent economic use
of property. Large diameter pipelines are almost certain to create
adverse impacts after abandonment, particularly in areas with corrosive
soils. Mitigation of these impacts includes pipe removal and land
restoration, complete fill of abandoned pipe, insertion of plugs to
prevent drainage, repurposing pipes for other purposes, and ongoing
corrosion control and monitoring.  The cost of this mitigation can be
very high. Landowners should not be burdened with restoration of their
land after use of the Keystone XL Pipeline is terminated. A failure to
mitigate abandoned large diameter pipes can have substantial impacts
on federal soil conservation and agricultural productivity programs
and wetlands and navigable water protection.  The only discussions
in the Draft EIS related to Abandonment are contained in a single
short paragraph in Section 2.6.2, and in a two sentences in Section
3.14.1.1. This discussion does no more than state that Applicant will
submit abandonment plans at the time of abandonment, and that such
plans would be approved at that time by regulating entities, if any.
The Draft EIS contains no discussion of impacts, alternatives, or
mitigation. Instead, it imposes on future generations consideration of
the impacts of and mitigation necessary for pipeline abandonment. Such
failure violates 42 USC §§ 4331(a), 4331(b)(1), 4332(C)(iv),
and 4332(F).  It is certain that the impacts caused by abandonment
of the Keystone XL Pipeline will come into existence, even if they
are decades in the future. No pipeline lasts forever. The impacts
caused by abandonment of this pipeline are foreseeable, inevitable,
and significant.

Moreover, the lack of need for the Keystone XL Pipeline means that
the DOS cannot dismiss the possibility that this pipeline would lose
commercial viability sooner than anticipated.  The nature and types
of impacts created by abandoned large-diameter are well understood,
even if not by federal decision makers. Congress intended that federal
decision makers be aware of the significant environmental impacts
of their actions, and to educate themselves about alternatives and
mitigation in the expectation that such knowledge will protect the
human and natural environment through improved decision making. Turning
a blind eye to these impacts would frustrate this intent. There is a
real need and practical opportunity for the DOS to assess the adverse
impacts that will result from abandonment of the Keystone XL Pipeline
and to educate itself and other federal and state agencies about
mitigation intended to minimize these impacts.  Although federal
agencies at present have no authority over pipeline easement
termination upon abandonment, and related mitigation, participating
state agencies have such authority. NEPA does not limit assessment of
impacts to only those impacts that are subject to federal regulation,
in part because Congress intended that NEPA review act to inform
Congress and agencies of significant impacts that have not yet been
addressed through federal programs.  In contrast to U.S. inaction, the
National Energy Board of Canada has undertaken a substantial regulatory
development effort, through its Land Matters Consultative Initiative,
to ensure that landowners are not harmed by abandoned pipelines,
and are not burdened with postabandonment mitigation efforts. Full
examination of the potential adverse impacts of abandonment of
the Keystone XL Pipelines will improve federal decision making and
help protect the environment, and as such is required under NEPA.
The Draft EIS’s failure to contain any discussion at all on the
impacts of abandonment mean that the Draft EIS is defective and must
be revised. The DOS must revise the Draft EIS to include a discussion
of the impacts of abandonment and issue an amended Draft EIS so that
citizens may have an opportunity to comment on these impacts. A failure
to provide an opportunity for comment would violate NEPA and the APA.
We further request that the permit be conditioned on national best
practice requirements for abandonment and mitigation, including
bonding, land restoration requirements, provision for damage claims,
and reversion on nonuse. We suggest the Iowa pipeline abandonment
law as one model.433 Other relevant models include Canadian federal
pipeline abandonment regulations, and those in use in Santa Barbara
County, California.  I.

The DEIS does not Adequately Address the Potential Adverse Impacts
of the Pipeline on Historic Cultural Resources of Native American
Nations along the Route.

The Draft EIS identifies at Table 3.11.4-1 a list of Native American
nations who have been contacted by the Department of State regarding
possible impacts of the proposed pipeline on historic cultural tribal
resources, pursuant to the requirements of 36 CFR 800.2. According
to 433

Iowa Code § 479.26, 479.29, 479.43, 479.45, 479.46, 479.48, 479.49.

the EIS, many of these consultations are still “on-going,” and
some nations and tribes have not formally responded to communications
from the Department of State. Although the proposed pipeline route
does not currently cross any lands owned by the various Native
American nations and tribes consulted with as a part of this process,
federal regulations require a process of formal consultation for
any properties of “historic significance” to Native American
nations and tribes.434 These same regulations further require that the
relevant federal agency “must, except where appropriate to protect
confidentiality concerns of affected parties, provide the public with
information about an undertaking and its effects on historic properties
and seek public comment and input.”435 To date, the public has been
provided with no information about the potential adverse impacts of the
Pipeline on cultural resources of Native American nations and tribes
along the proposed pipeline route. Indeed, it would be impossible for
the Department of State to have done so, because formal consultations
with affected Native American nations and tribes were incomplete at the
time the Draft EIS was published. In order for all affected parties,
including members of the general public, to adequately comment in this
important issue, it is vital that the Department of State complete
the required process of consultation with affected Native American
nations and tribes prior to publishing a final EIS. It is also vital
that the results of these consultations be made available for public
comment, as required by federal regulation.  Without gathering this
information through a rigorous process of formal consultation and
subjecting the findings and conclusions to public comment, the impacts
of the Pipeline on important Native American cultural resources cannot
be properly predicted or adequately mitigated by a final EIS.  V.

LEGAL INADEQUACIES IN THE EIS AND THE PRESIDENTIAL PERMIT PROCESS A.

DOS Cannot Act as the Lead Agency in the NEPA Process.

DOS cannot and should not act as the lead agency in the NEPA process
for the Keystone XL pipeline. The NEPA regulations set forth a list of
factors for determining the lead agency on a project involving more
than one federal agency. 40 CFR § 1501.5. These include magnitude
of agency's involvement, project approval and disapproval authority,
expertise concerning the action's environmental effects, duration of
agency's involvement, and sequence of agency's involvement. Id. DOS
abused its discretion in assuming the role of lead agency for
several reasons, including but not limited to (a) DOS’ claimed
involvement over the pipeline is limited to border facilities; (b)
DOS has little or no expertise concerning the environmental impacts
of oil pipelines or tar sands development; and (c) DOS will contend
that its NEPA process is legally unreviewable.  DOS should not be the
lead agency because its involvement in the project is minor compared
to the involvement of other agencies. DOS acted as the lead agency and
conducted an EIS, including mitigation measures and permit conditions,
for the entire Alberta Clipper tar 434 435

36 CFR § 800.2(c)(2)(ii).  36 CFR § 800.2(d)(2).  123

sands pipeline. During litigation, however, DOS has claimed that
its Presidential Permit regulates only the Alberta Clipper pipeline
at the actual border and does not extend beyond the first mainline
shutoff valve.436 The extent of DOS’ claimed involvement, then, is
limited to the international border. 437 This is hardly a level of
involvement that would warrant DOS acting as the lead agency for a
pipeline that would transport hazardous material across six states.
The extent of other agencies’ involvement is far greater.438
For example, DOT is tasked with ensuring that the pipeline design,
construction, operation, and emergency response plans comply with
safety standards and protect the communities and sensitive areas
along the entire route of the pipeline. The Army Corp of Engineers
issues permits for the thousands of water crossings in each of the
states along the length of the pipeline to ensure the protection of the
environment and natural resources and local communities.439 Courts have
generally required that the agency with the major responsibility over
the action to act as the lead agency. See Natural Res. Def. Council,
Inc. v. Callaway, 524 F.2d 79, 86 (2d Cir. 1975). In Callaway, the
court reviewed the Navy’s lead agency determination and held that
it was the proper lead agency because it was “active in all aspects
of the project” and “was responsible for …seeing that the work
was properly performed.” Id. at 86; see also Hanly v. Mitchell,
460 F.2d 640. 645 (2d Cir. 1972). Here, DOS is not active in all
aspects of the Keystone XL project, as is DOT and the Army Corp of
Engineers. It is not tasked with ensuring that the pipeline is built
and operated pursuant to pipeline safety regulations. DOS’ only
involvement is issuing a permit for the border crossing based on
whether the project serves the national interest.  DOS also lacks
any expertise that would to qualify as the lead agency. DOS is the
agency that handles matters of diplomacy, foreign affairs, and foreign
policy concerns. It has no expertise or experience with pipeline
regulation, evaluating the environmental and social impacts of tar
sands infrastructure, or ensuring that plans are in place to prevent
oil spills and to respond if an accident were to occur. On the other
hand, the Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration (DOT)
would be a logical choice for lead agency because it has particular
expertise in pipeline design, safety, and regulation.  436

Defendants’ Reply in Support of Motion to Dismiss Plaintiffs’
First Amended Complaint, No.  09-2622 (D. Minn. Dec. 12, 2009) at 19,
attached as Exhibit 129. (“[t]he Presidential Permit only authorizes
the construction of pipeline facilities at the Canadian border
[and the] State Department’s authority to regulate the pipeline
extends only to the first mainline shut-off valve or pumping station
in the United States.”) (citations and internal quotations omitted).
Commenters dispute DOS’ authority to issue Presidential Permits for
tar sands pipelines in general as well as its authority to regulate
pipelines within the U.S. In response to that argument in the Alberta
Clipper Alberta lawsuit (to which Sierra Club was a named Plaintiff),
DOS argued that it was not regulating the pipeline because the extent
of its involvement is limited to border facilities. If that is the
case, DOS should not oversee the NEPA process for Keystone XL. DOS
cannot have it both ways— it cannot overstate its role in order to be
the lead agency, and then argue that the NEPA process is unreviewable
because its role is limited to the border crossing.  438 439

See DEIS at tbl. 7 (listing involved agencies and the scope of
their involvement).  See DEIS at App. E, Waterbody Crossing Tables
(listing Keystone XL’s water crossings).  124

Finally, it is improper for DOS to assume the role of lead
agency and subsequently contend that its NEPA process is legally
unreviewable. DOS has done exactly that with respect to two recent
tar sands pipelines that are similar to Keystone XL.  DOS took the
lead role in the preparation of an EIS for the Keystone I pipeline,
which culminated in a Final Environmental Impact Statement (FEIS)
and the issuance of a ROD and Presidential Permit in February of
2008. When environmental groups challenged DOS’s NEPA compliance,
DOS took the position that because Executive Order 133337 delegated the
President’s inherent authority to issue border crossing permits, the
DOS NEPA process was an unreviewable Presidential action rather than
an agency action. Federal district court judges in Washington, DC and
South Dakota agreed with DOS and held that courts could not examine the
adequacy of the NEPA process, allowing DOS to avoid accountability.440
DOS took the same position with respect to the Alberta Clipper pipeline
in 2009, arguing that the Presidential Permit and accompanying NEPA
documents were unreviewable Presidential actions.441 DOS is sure to
make the same argument, as it has in the three previous tar sands
pipeline cases, in an attempt to avoid accountability on the Keystone
XL NEPA process. If DOS again prevails on this argument, it would
suggest that DOS can completely disregard NEPA laws and regulations,
issue a wholly inadequate EIS, and escape any review by the courts.
No agency should be permitted to routinely assume the role of lead
agency for a narrow class of projects and routinely exempt itself
from judicial review, as it would contravene the basic purpose and
intent of NEPA—to ensure that agencies consider the environmental
impacts of their decision.  Congress passed NEPA in 1969, casting
the statute as a landmark national effort to “encourage productive
and enjoyable harmony between man and his environment; to promote
efforts which will prevent or eliminate damage to the environment
and biosphere and stimulate the health and welfare of man; to enrich
the understanding of the ecological systems and natural resources
important to the Nation.” 42 U.S.C. § 4321. The EIS requirement
lies at the heart of NEPA, and its purpose is to provide a “full and
fair discussion” of impacts like greenhouse gas emissions and global
warming implications, fully informing “decisionmakers and the public
of the reasonable alternatives which would avoid or minimize” these
impacts. 40 C.F.R. § 1502.1.  The NEPA review process “places upon
[the action] agency the obligation to consider every significant
aspect of the environmental impact of a proposed action… [and]
it ensures that the agency will inform the public that it has indeed
considered environmental concerns in its decisionmaking process.”
Kern v. United States Bureau of Land Management, 284 F.3d 1062,
1066 (9th Cir. 2002); see also Columbia Basin Protection Ass’n
v. Schlesinger, 643 F.2d 585,

See Order of Sept. 29, 2009 (D. S.D.), attached as Exhibit 130; Order
of Sept. 29, 2009 (D.  D.C.) attached as Exhibit 131.  441 Fortunately,
the Minnesota District Court came to the opposite conclusion as the
other judges and correctly held that the DOS’s NEPA process is an
agency action subject to judicial review.  Order of Feb. 24, 2010
(D.Minn.), attached as Exhibit 132.  125

592 (9th Cir. 1981) (“[T]he preparation of an EIS ensures that other
officials, Congress and the public can evaluate the environmental
consequences independently.”).  Courts play in integral role,
ensuring that the “form, content, and preparation [of and EIS]
substantially (1) provide[s] decision-makers with an environmental
disclosure sufficiently detailed to aid in the substantive decision
whether to proceed with the project in light of its environmental
consequences, and (2) make[s] available to the public, information
of the proposed project’s environmental impacts and encourage
participation in the development of that information.” Trout
Unlimited v. Morton, 509 F.2d 1276, 1283 (9th Cir. 1974).  A NEPA
process that is shielded from judicial review, as DOS advocates for
in cases of tar sands pipeline permits, would violate the meaning of,
and congressional intent behind NEPA.  Therefore, DOS should step
aside and allow an agency with more involvement and expertise in
pipeline issues to assume the role of lead agency.  B.

DOS Lacks Authority to Issue Presidential Permits.

DOS does not have the constitutional or statutory authority to
issue the Keystone XL Presidential Permit. Every action taken
by the President or an executive agency must come from some
legal source—either a statute or the constitution. No statute
authorizes DOS to issue Presidential Permits for oil pipelines,
and the U.S. Constitution requires Congress, not the executive
branch, to exclusively regulate matters of foreign commerce.  The
U.S. Constitution expressly empowers Congress to “regulate commerce
with foreign nations . . .” Art. I, Section 8, cl. 3. The President
does not have that power, nor does any executive agency. U.S. v. Guy
W. Capps, Inc., 204 F.2d 655, 659 (4th Cir. 1953) (“[T]he power
to regulate interstate and foreign commerce is not among the powers
incident to the Presidential office, but is expressly vested by the
Constitution in the Congress”).  The proposed Keystone XL pipeline
is a clear example of foreign commerce that falls under the control
of Congress. Courts have interpreted Congress’s foreign commerce
power very broadly. "The [Supreme] Court has been unwavering in reading
Congress' power over foreign commerce broadly." United States v. Clark,
435 F.3d 1100, 1113 (9th Cir. 2006) (citations omitted) (discussing
the “complete power of Congress over foreign commerce” and noting
that Congress can regulate services as well as goods, and regulate the
“channels of commerce.”); see also Gibbons v. Ogden, 22 U.S. 1,
193 (1824) (stating that “it has . . . been universally admitted
that [the words of the Commerce Clause] comprehend every species
of commercial intercourse between the United States and foreign
nations."); Bankers Ass'n v.  Shultz, 416 U.S. 21, 46 (1974) (stating
that Congress' plenary authority over foreign commerce "is not open
to dispute"); Buttfield v. Stranahan, 192 U.S. 470, 492–93 (1904)
(describing the "complete power of Congress over foreign commerce");
U.S. v. Bredimus, 352 F.3d 200, 208 (5th Cir. 2003) (“Congress's
authority to regulate foreign commerce is even broader than its
authority to regulate interstate commerce”).  Oil pipelines are
matters of foreign commerce, as evidenced by the long history of
congressional regulation of oil pipelines. See The Hepburn Act of 1906,
Pub.L. No. 59-337, § 1,

34 Stat. 584, 584 (expanding the Interstate Commerce Act to cover
interstate oil pipelines; U.S.  v. Ohio Oil Co., 234 U.S. 548,
560-561 (1914) (upholding the constitutionality of the Hepburn
Act under the interstate commerce clause); Department of Energy
Organization Act of 1977, 42 U.S.C.A. § 7111 et seq. (transferring
regulatory authority over oil pipelines to Federal Energy Regulatory
Commission (“FERC”)). In State v. Brown, a federal court held
that the TransAlaska Pipeline System was a matter of foreign commerce
despite the fact that the pipeline did not cross an international or
state border, and noting that “[t]here is no question that [the
Export Administration Act of 1979, which regulates the pipeline],
operates well within the sphere of the foreign commerce power.”
State v. Brown, 850 F.Supp. 821 (D. Alaska 1994).  The Keystone
XL pipeline, which will import up to 900,000 barrels a day of tar
sands crude oil and transport it across the international border
and across six states from Alberta, Canada, to Texas, is a matter of
foreign and interstate commerce. Congress is the only entity that can
constitutionally issue a permit to import a product such as tar sands
into the U.S.  Congress may delegate its authority to regulate foreign
commerce to the President. See Target Sportswear Inc. v. U.S., 875
F.Supp. 835, 838 n.2 (Ct. Int’l Trade 1995) (“Fundamentally, under
the U.S. Constitution the authority to regulate foreign commerce and
trade with other nations lies exclusively with the Congress… [but]
Congress may delegate such authority to the Executive.”). Congress
has delegated its permitting authority over many other specific types
of cross-border facilities, such as bridges (International Bridge
Act, 33 U.S.C. § 535(b) (1972)), natural gas pipelines (Natural
Gas Act, 15 U.S.C.A. § 717 et seq. (1938)), and telegraph cables
(Kellogg Act, 47 U.S.C.A. § 34 et seq. (1921)). It has not, however,
delegated permitting authority over international oil pipelines to
the President, DOS, or any executive agency.  Absent a delegation
of power from Congress, the President cannot regulate commerce.
In the seminal case of Youngstown Sheet and Tube Co. v. Sawyer, 343
U.S. 579 (1952), the Court held that the Secretary of Commerce’s
wartime seizure of domestic steel mills under an Executive Order
exceeded the President’s constitutional power. The court found the
seizure unconstitutional because, like in the instant case, there
was no express constitutional language granting the power to the
President, nor was there a statute authorizing it. Id. at 585–87.
The only claimed authority to issue Presidential Permits derives
from Exec. Order No.  11,423, 33 Fed. Reg. 11741 (1968) (as amended
by Exec. Order No. 13,337, 69 Fed. Reg. 25,299 (2004)), which states
that the Secretary of State is “designated and empowered to receive
all applications for Presidential permits . . . for the construction,
connection, operation, or maintenance, at the borders of the United
States, of facilities for the exportation or importation of petroleum,
petroleum products, coal, or other fuels to or from a foreign
country.” Exec. Order No. 13,337 Section 1(a), 69 Fed. Reg. 25299
(2004) (emphasis added). The Executive Order is not rooted in any
congressional grant of authority, and cites only the “the authority
vested in [the] President by the Constitution and the laws of the
United States of America.” Id. The later Executive Orders do not
cite any congressional authority for executive branch regulation of
pipelines either.  The Keystone XL Presidential Permit, if issued,
would also be ultra vires. The Executive’s regulation of foreign
commerce cannot exceed that which was delegated by

Congress. Target Sportswear v. U.S., 875 F.Supp. 835, 841 (Ct. Int'l
Trade 1995). Congress has made partial delegations of authority to
specific executive agencies, not including the State Department, for
very limited aspects of international oil pipeline regulation. For
example, Congress delegated limited authority to the Department of
Transportation (DOT) in the Hazardous Liquid Pipeline Safety Act
of 1979, Pub.L. 96-129, 93 Stat. 1003. Congress also specified the
Executive’s role in the safety of international pipelines in the
Pipeline Safety Act of 1992, Pub.L. 102-508, 106 Stat. 3289; Energy
Policy Act of 1992, Pub.L. 102-486, 49 U.S.C.  §112 et seq.; and
the Pipeline Inspection, Protection, Enforcement, and Safety Act,
Pub.L. 109– 468, 49 U.S.C. §60134 et seq., (2006).  In any of
those statutes, Congress could have authorized the State Department to
issue permits for international oil pipelines, but it did not. That
indicates a congressional intent to reserve authority over both
international and domestic oil pipelines. See I.N.S. v. Chadha, 462
U.S. 919, 954 n.16 (1983) (an executive agency “cannot reach beyond
the limits of the statute” and is “always subject to check by the
terms of the legislation that authorized it; and if that authority
is exceeded it is open to judicial review as well as the power of
Congress to modify or revoke the authority entirely…”). Because
the State Department’s action is beyond those limited grants of
authority, its action is unconstitutional and ultra vires. Id; and Guy
W. Capps, Inc., 204 F.2d at 658.  Any constitutional authority that
the President may have over this pipeline under his foreign affairs or
commander-in-chief powers, which commenters dispute, would be limited
to the actual international border crossing and nothing more. This
permit would exceed the President authority, as it would regulate
1,379 miles of pipeline and related facilities in six states.  C.

The DOS has not Complied with APA Rulemaking.

We are also concerned that DOS has not complied with the Administrative
Procedure Act’s notice and comment requirements before . 5
U.S.C. §553. While Exec. Order No. 13337 contains some guidance on
procedures and standards for review, mainly whether the issuance of
the permit would “serve the national interest,” the Executive
Order does not include a complete permit application process, or
specify how the DOS is to determine whether or not a pipeline is in
the “national interest.” The only guidance document regarding
the issuance of presidential permits is a “Fact Sheet” entitled
“Applying for Presidential Permits for Border Crossing Facilities
(Canada)” (Fact Sheet) that sets forth more specific parameters with
respect to both the contents of permit applications and the application
review process. This Fact Sheet is a statement of general applicability
and future effect designed to implement, interpret, and prescribe law
and policy and describing the Department’s organization, procedure,
and practice requirements as they relate to the substantive rights
of the applicant and US citizens who may be directly impacted by a
grant of the requested permit. Therefore, the Fact Sheet is subject
to APA rulemaking requirements in 5 U.S.C. § 553, including the
APA’s notice and comment requirements.
