Dear Owner:

You by now are aware that TransCanada Keystone Pipeline
LP. ("Keystone") is constructing and will operate a 1,833 mile crude
oil pipeline, which will begin in Canada and will cross through
approximately 1,073 miles of property in the United States, including
Nebraska. As you know, the path of the pipeline will cross a portion
of your property.

In order to construct the pipeline, Kaystone must acquire a permanent
and temporary easement over your property. It is Keystone's strong
preference to negotiate a voluntary transfer with each property
owner. However, in the event we cannot come to an agreement, Keystone
will use eminent domain to acquire the casement, which is authorized
pursuant to Nebraska Revised Statute ยง 57-1101 et. seq.

The description of the proposed permanent and temporary easements is
described in the enclosed form of easement end its attachments.

As consideration for granting Keystone these easements, TransCanada
is offering you the total sum of This sum includes $[redacted]
for the permanent easement, which represents 100% of the total fee
value for the permanent easement, despite the fact the permanent
easement encompasses significantly less property rights than the total
fee. Additionally, the amaunt includes [redacted] for the temporary
easement which is based upon a rental value of 50% of the fee value
per year. Finally, Keystone will provide compensation for any damages
that occur during the course of the construction including crop loss
and any damages to fences, trees or other improvements.

This letter is Keystone's final offer, and it will remain open
for one month after the date of this letter or until you reject
it. We believe the amount of the offer is a premium price for your
property. Keystone's offer is high because the company prefers to
acquire this property through negotiation and to avoid litigation
and its associated delays and risks. In order to accept this offer,
please have the authorized person(s) execute two original Easement
and Right of Way forms before a notary public and return them to me
in the enclosed postage pre-paid envelope before the expiration of
the one month period. Also enclosed is a W-9 tax form that needs to
be completely filled out, signed and returned along with the other
forms. We will deliver the agreed upon amount of compensation to you
immediately upon our receipt of the signed and notarized documents.

While we hope to acquire this property through negotiation, if we
are unable to do so, we will be forced to invoke the power of eminent
domain and will initiate condemnation proceedings against this property
promptly after the expiration of this one month period. In the event
that we are forced to invoke the power of eminent domain, this letter
and its contents are subject ta Nebraska Revised Statute ยง 27-408
and are not admissible to prove the existence or amount of liability.

Please contact me in the event you have any questions or concerns at
(832) 320-5294.

Sincerely,