## Indirect Cumulative Impacts and Life-Cycle Greenhouse Gas Emissions

### Overview and Summary

The Supplemental EIS evaluates the relationship between climate change and the proposed Project in several ways:

• First, the potential contributions of the proposed Project to greenhouse gas emissions are addressed in the air quality analyses found in Section 3.12 and Section 4.12, Air Quality and Noise.

• Second, the potential impact of future predicted climate change effects (such as temperature and precipitation changes in the proposed Project area) on the construction and operation of the proposed Project itself is described in Section 4.14, Climate Change Impacts on the Proposed Project.

• Finally, this section presents information and analysis regarding indirect cumulative impacts and life-cycle greenhouse gas emissions including the potential impact of further development of the Western Canadian Sedimentary Basin (WCSB) oil sands on climate change.

This discussion on GHG life-cycle emissions associated with oil sands is provided in response to comments received during the Final EIS process and scoping for the Supplemental EIS and to assess recent and updated studies undertaken by others that were referred to in this analysis.
The comments received included requests for analysis of the potential climate impacts of increasing development of the WCSB oil sands associated with the proposed Project.
While such a broad review is typically beyond the scope of NEPA, this Supplemental EIS nonetheless presents information and analysis related to the proposed Project's potential life-cycle climate impacts.
The market analysis presented in Section 1.4 is a critical input to the analysis in terms of how the proposed Project is expected to impact further development of the WCSB oil sands compared to the No Action Alternative in which the proposed Project is denied.

The key findings from this analysis of the indirect cumulative impacts and life-cycle GHG emissions are:

• This Supplemental EIS examined the potential for growth-induced impacts that could be associated with the proposed Project in Section 1.4, and it is unlikely that the proposed Project construction would have a substantial impact on the rate of WCSB oil sands development.
As described in Section 1.4, even when considering the incremental cost of non-pipeline transport options, should the proposed Project be denied, a 0.4 to 0.6 percent reduction in WCSB production could occur by 2030, and should both the proposed Project and all other proposed pipeline projects not be built, a 2 to 4 percent decrease in WCSB oil sands production could occur by 2030.[^10]

[^10:] The International Energy Outlook extends to 2035.
In 2035, the production change would be 120,000 bpd, which would be 2.4 percent of the total International Energy Outlook forecasted production for the oil sands.

• Based upon the market analysis in Section 1.4, the incremental life-cycle emissions associated with the proposed Project are estimated in the range of 0.07 to 0.83 million metric tons carbon dioxide equivalent (MMTCO2e) annually if the proposed Project were not built, and in the range of 0.35 to 5.3 MMTCO2e annually if all pipeline projects were denied, based on the following: [^11]

[^11:] As discussed in 1.4.6.3, Rail Potential to Transport WCSB Crude, if it is assumed that the difference in the cost of transport by rail were $7.50 rather than $5.00 per barrel, then the reduction in production would be 50 percent more.
Under such an assumption, this change in production would represent a 50 percent reduction in GHG emissions above those indicated in the text above.
This would equate to 0.1 to 1.3 MMTCO2e should the proposed Project be denied, and 0.5 to 8.0 MMTCO2e should both the proposed Project and all other proposed pipeline projects not be built.

− The full range of incremental GHG emissions associated with the more carbon-intensive WCSB oil sands that would be transported through the proposed Project across the analyzed reference crudes (which could be displaced at the Gulf Coast refineries) is estimated in the range of 3.3 to 20.8 MMTCO2e annually[^12]

[^12:] As noted elsewhere in the Supplemental EIS, the near-term initial throughput of the proposed Project is projected to be 830,000 barrels of crude per day with 100,000 bpd supplied by Bakken crude production and the remaining 730,000 bpd supplied by the WCSB oil sands.
However, the GHG emission estimates assume that the full 830,000 bpd pipeline capacity is used to transport only WCSB crude.

(the methodology used to derive this range is explained further in this section).

− If the proposed Project was not built, analysis demonstrates that WCSB oil sands would likely be developed, but there is potentially a 0.4 to 0.6 percent reduction in production, and if all other proposed pipeline projects were not built, there would potentially be a 2 to 4 percent reduction in WCSB oil sands production.

− The range of GHG emissions represents the incremental GHG emissions for displacement of the analyzed reference crudes for the stated scenarios.[^13]

[^13:] Note that these estimates do not consider differences in transportation or refining GHG emissions for WCSB oil sands crude sent to non-U.S. Gulf Coast refineries and is based on average GHG emission estimates from near-term WCSB oil sands production.

• The largest share, or approximately 70 to 80 percent, of WTW GHG[^14] emissions from the fuel life-cycle occurs during fuel combustion itself, regardless of the study design and input assumptions.

14: Reference to the various stages in the life cycle from crude extraction from the reservoir, to refining, and to combustion of the refined fuel products is typically referred to as a "well-to-wheels" (WTW) analysis.

• A large source of variance in fuel life-cycle GHG studies is the treatment of lower-value products such as petroleum coke, electricity exports from cogeneration, and secondary carbon effects such as land-use change and capital equipment.
While the issue of petroleum coke is an important consideration to GHG lifecycle analyses, it is important when comparing WCSB oil sands and the reference crudes that the full life-cycle be evaluated, not just the upstream or refining stage.
The issue of petroleum coke is not a standalone issue for the WCSB oil sands; it is also a LCA consideration for the heavy conventional crudes.
The petroleum coke-associated GHG emissions from oil sands should fundamentally be similar to some heavy reference crudes.

• Producing a barrel of premium fuels (i.e., gasoline, diesel, and kerosene/jet fuel) from bitumen produces roughly the same amount of petroleum coke as a barrel of premium fuels refined from heavy crudes, such as Venezuelan Bachaquero or Mexican Maya.
The actual net GHG emissions from petroleum coke, however, depend on the final end use of the petroleum coke (i.e., whether it is stockpiled or combusted) and how its end use affects demand for other fuels such as coal.
Since a portion of the petroleum coke produced from upgrading WCSB oil sands bitumen is currently stockpiled and not combusted, whereas the petroleum coke produced from refining reference crudes at Gulf Coast refineries is combusted.
As a result, GHG emissions from petroleum coke produced from WCSB oil sands crudes are slightly lower than petroleum coke GHG emissions from other heavy reference crudes.

• The relative GHG-intensity of both reference crudes and oil sands-derived crudes will change differently over time.
Conventional (deep) crude reservoirs require higher energy intensive secondary and tertiary production techniques as the reservoirs deplete and as water cut of the produced reservoir fluids increases.
Oil sands surface mining is expected to have a relatively constant energy intensity long into the future.

Further details of the indirect cumulative impacts and life-cycle GHG emissions analysis are provided in the following sections.

### Introduction to Indirect Life-Cycle GHG Emissions

To assist in providing information regarding the carbon intensity of WCSB oil sands crudes compared to other crude oils, the Final EIS included a key studies review in the existing literature that address life-cycle GHG emissions of petroleum products, including petroleum products derived from WCSB oil sands, and a comparison of life-cycle GHG emissions reported in the literature for WCSB oil sands-derived crude oil and refined products with those of reference crude oils.
A summary of the analysis is presented in the following sections and the full report is presented in Appendix W, Life-Cycle Greenhouse Gas Emissions of Petroleum Products from WCSB Oil Sands Crudes Compared with Reference Crudes.
Project-level GHG emissions are presented in Sections 3.12, Air Quality and Noise (Affected Environment); 4.12, Air Quality and Noise (Environmental Consequences); and 4.15.3, Cumulative Impacts by Resource, which provide a discussion of climate change-related risks on the proposed Project.
The Department is providing this information as a matter of policy, although the proposed Project would not substantively influence the rate or magnitude of oil extraction activities in Canada, or the overall volume of crude oil transported to the U.S. or refined in the U.S. (see Section 1.4, Market Analysis).

Thus, while this section provides an assessment of the differences between the life-cycle GHG emissions associated with WCSB oil sands-derived crudes that may be refined in the United States versus reference crudes, it also specifically compares results from other literature against the National Energy Technology Laboratory (NETL) studies' base case.
A more detailed description of the ICF review is provided in Appendix W, Life-Cycle Greenhouse Gas Emissions.

This analysis reflects recent updates to previous life-cycle assessments (LCAs) of GHG emissions from oil sands-derived crudes, such as the updated report by Jacobs (2012), which offers new analysis and correlates the results with data reported to and audited by the Canadian government.
Findings based on these new data have been included in this assessment.
This analysis also includes a discussion of the GHG emissions associated with the production and combustion of petroleum coke produced by refining crude oils.

### Life-Cycle Carbon Overview

Evaluating life-cycle emissions provides a method to assess the relative GHG emissions between various sources of crude oil.
The LCA methodology attempts to identify, quantify, and track carbon emissions arising from the development and use of a hydrocarbon resource.
It is helpful to characterize carbon emissions into what can be considered primary and secondary flows.
The primary carbon emissions are associated with the various stages in the life-cycle from the extraction of the crude from the reservoir to refining to combustion of the refined fuel products (typically referred to as a well-to-wheels analysis).
The secondary carbon emissions are associated with activities (e.g., land use impacts) not directly related to conversion of the hydrocarbon resource into useful product fuels.

Most of the GHG emissions from hydrocarbon resource development result in three primary steps in the LCA: production of the crude oil, refining of the crude oil, and combustion of the refined products.
Transportation of the crude oil to the refinery and transportation of the products to market also contribute to GHG emissions (discussions of these emissions for the proposed Project are presented in Sections 3.12 and 4.12, Air Quality and Noise), although these pieces of the life-cycle tend to be significantly smaller than the production, refining, and combustion stages referred to above.

The primary objective of refining crude oil is to produce three premium refined products: gasoline, diesel, and kerosene/jet fuel (i.e., gasoline and distillates).
In addition to the primary emissions arising from the production, transportation, refining, and combustion steps of the LCA, a range of secondary carbon emissions should be considered.
For example, extracting crude can influence secondary GHG emissions, such as changes in biological or soil carbon stocks resulting from land-use change during mining.
In addition to premium fuels, typically 5 to 10 percent of the carbon in the petroleum resource ends up in co-products, such as petroleum coke, that are often (but not always) combusted and therefore emit carbon dioxide (CO2).
As discussed in greater detail below, these secondary flows are treated differently across the LCA literature and estimates of specific process inputs and emission factors vary according to the underlying methods and data sources used in each LCA.

The GHG emission factors modeled by NETL are based on a well-to-wheels (WTW) LCA.
WTW assessments for petroleum-based fuels focus on the GHG emissions associated with extraction of the crude oil from reservoirs, transportation of crude oils to refineries, refining of the crude oil, distribution of refined product (e.g., gasoline, diesel, and jet fuel) to retail markets, and combustion of these fuels in vehicles or planes.
For some WCSB oil sands crude oils, the assessment also addresses upgrading of the extracted crude oil (i.e., partial refining of some oil sands crude oils to produce synthetic crude oil).
Other analyses (e.g., well-to-tank [WTT] analyses) establish different life-cycle boundaries and evaluate only the emissions associated with the processes prior to combustion of the refined products.

Inclusion of the combustion phase allows for a more complete picture of crude oil contribution to GHG emissions because this phase represents between approximately 70 to 80 percent (depending on crude source) of the WTW emissions (IHS CERA 2010, 2011).
As a result, a WTW analysis reduces the percent differential in total GHG emissions between different crude oil sources.
Because a WTT analysis focuses on pre-combustion processes, it highlights the differences in upstream life-cycle GHG emissions associated with the extraction, transportation, and refining of crude oils from different sources, as illustrated in a comparison of Figure 4.15.3-3 and Figure 4.15.3-4.

### Scope of Review of Life-Cycle Studies

A list of the reports reviewed for this assessment is presented in Table 4.15-20.
The primary studies and additional supplemental reports for the assessment were selected on the following basis:

• The reports evaluate WCSB oil sands crude oils in comparison to crude oils from other sources;

• The reports focus on GHG impacts throughout the life-cycle of crude oils and their related products;

Environmental Consequences 4.15-85 March 2013

• The reports were published within the last 10 years (with one exception), and most were published within the last 5 years; and

• The reports represent the perspectives of various stakeholders, including industry, governmental organizations, and non-governmental organizations.

**Table 4.15-20 Primary and Additional Studies Evaluated^a**

^a: See Appendix W, Life-Cycle Greenhouse Gas Emissions, for more information on each study.

**Primary Studies Analyzed** **Type**

NETL. 2008.
Development of Baseline Data and Analysis of Life-cycle Greenhouse Gas

Emissions of Petroleum-Based Fuels.
Individual LCA

NETL 2009.
An Evaluation of the Extraction, Transport and Refining of Imported Crude Oils and the Impact of Life-cycle Greenhouse Gas Emissions.

Individual LCA

International Energy Agency (IEA). 2010.
World Energy Outlook.
Meta-analysis IHS CERA. 2010.
Oil Sands, Greenhouse Gases, and U.S. Oil Supply: Getting the Numbers

Right.
Meta-analysis

IHS CERA. 2011.
Oil Sands, Greenhouse Gases, and European Oil Supply: Getting the Numbers Right.

Meta-analysis

Natural Resources Defense Council (NRDC). 2010.
GHG Emission Factors for High Carbon Intensity Crude Oils ver. 2.

Meta-analysis

Energy-Redefined LLC for ICCT. 2010.
Carbon Intensity of Crude Oil in Europe Crude.
Individual LCA AERI/Jacobs Consultancy. 2009.
Life-cycle Assessment Comparison of North American and

Imported Crudes.
Individual LCA

Jacobs. 2012.
EU Pathway Study: Life-cycle Assessment of Crude Oils in a European Context Individual LCA AERI/TIAX LLC. 2009.
Comparison of North American and Imported Crude Oil Lifecycle

GHG Emissions.
Individual LCA

Charpentier, et al. 2009.
Understanding the Canadian Oil Sands Industry's Greenhouse Gas Emissions.

Meta-analysis

Brandt, A. 2011.
Upstream greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions from Canadian oil sands as a feedstock for European refineries.

Meta-analysis

**Additional Studies/Models Analyzed** **Type**

RAND Corporation. 2008.
Unconventional Fossil-Based Fuels: Economic and Environmental

Trade-Offs.
Individual LCA

Pembina. 2005.
Oil Sands Fever: The Environmental Implications of Canada's Oil Sands Rush.

Partial LCA

Pembina. 2006.
Carbon Neutral 2020: A Leadership Opportunity in Canada's Oil Sands.
Oil sands issue paper 2.

Partial LCA

McCann and Associates. 2001.
Typical Heavy Crude and Bitumen Derivative Greenhouse Gas Life-cycles.

Individual LCA

Pembina. 2011.
Life-cycle assessments of oil sands greenhouse gas emissions: A checklist for robust analysis.

White Paper

GHGenius. 2010.
GHGenius Model, Version 3.19.
Natural Resources Canada.
Model GREET. 2010.
Greenhouse Gases, Regulated Emissions, and Energy Use in Transportation

Model, Version 1.8d.1.
Argonne National Laboratory.
Model

Rooney et al. 2012.
Oil Sands Mining and Reclamation Cause Massive Loss of Peatland and Stored Carbon.

Land use change journal article

Yeh et al. 2010.
Land Use Greenhouse Gas Emissions from Conventional Oil Production and Oil Sands.

Land use change journal article

Evaluation of the results from the primary and additional studies included in this assessment must take into account the treatment of co-products in each study.
In a refinery, gasoline, diesel, and jet fuel are all co-products; other co-products produced from upgrading and refining crude oil can include petroleum coke, liquefied petroleum gas (LPG), sulfur, and surplus cogenerated electricity.
Three different approaches are used for handling co-products in LCAs: all co-products can be included within the LCA boundary (also known as system expansion); a process can be split or separated into two or more subprocesses that each describe an individual product; or, when neither of the previous options are possible, the allocation process can be used to attribute a portion of GHG emissions to each co-product.

Allocation allows LCA practitioners to exclude other co-products from the LCA system boundary and only consider the GHG emissions associated with making and consuming the co-product of interest.
Some studies apply a substitution credit for the fuels that are offset in other markets by the use of co-products, such as petroleum coke.
Although individual studies may be internally consistent in how they treat allocation and co-products, the different approaches to accounting for co-products can have a significant impact on life-cycle emissions,[^15] and can result in apples-to-oranges comparisons across the studies.
Therefore, this assessment has avoided direct comparisons between studies that use different methods to account for co-products.
The first two columns in Table 4.15-21 show the variation in allocation and substitution approaches used in the various studies, particularly with regard to the treatment of petroleum coke and the electricity cogeneration.
Several studies do not explicitly state how they have dealt with these issues.

[^15] For instance, IHS CERA (2010) found that including petroleum coke combustion would increase WTW GHG emissions for a barrel of refined products by 8 to 10 percent, depending on crude type.

The primary and additional studies list reflects recent updates to previous LCAs of GHG emissions from oil sands-derived crudes and information on GHG emissions associated with land use.
Jacobs (2012) and IHS CERA (2011) both examined life-cycle GHG emissions from producing gasoline and diesel from WCSB oil sands derived crudes for European markets.
Jacobs (2012) developed carbon intensities for Alberta crudes based on first order engineering principles and models and calculation methods used in the GREET (2010) model.
Jacobs (2012) also correlated the results with data reported to and audited by the Canadian government.

Regulatory authorities in Alberta require extensive information on bitumen production ranging from fugitive and flaring data to the energy consumption and GHG emissions from bitumen production both from in situ mining and from mining-upgrading.
Jacob's GHG emissions for producing the heavy Alberta crude oils by steam-assisted gravity drainage are based on engineering estimates using energy consumption that has a close correlation with data reported to the Alberta government (Jacobs 2012, p.5-41).
Jacobs' evaluation of the carbon intensity of mining and upgrading is based on data from audited industry and government reports, and engineering estimates based on estimated parameters governing crude oil production.

Engineering models to estimate energy consumption and GHG emissions from bitumen production correlated well with energy use and GHG emissions reported to the Government of Alberta.
Jacobs (2012) used a similar set of engineering models and industry literature as the previous Jacobs (2009) study, but correlated the results with data reported to and audited by the Canadian government.
IHS CERA (2011) does not contain any changes in emission estimates from IHS CERA (2010) except for the combustion emissions from end use of refined products.[^16]

[^16:] IHS CERA (2010) provides a value of 384 kilograms (kg) CO2e per barrel of refined product; IHS CERA (2011) provides a value of 402 kg CO2e per barrel of refined product.
It is not clear from the 2010 report what refined product blend was used to estimate the combustion emissions value.
However, it is clear that the refined product blend used in the 2011 study is different from the one used in the 2010 study.
Combustion emissions from end use of refined products are assumed to be the same across all crudes examined in each study.

For WCSB oil sands crude oils, the assessment focused on those that could be transported through the proposed Project.
Based on this criterion, the solid, raw bitumen from oil sands was eliminated except to the extent that it is included within averaged results (e.g., NETL provides a single WCSB oil sands estimate that represents a weighted average of 43 percent crude bitumen from in situ production and 57 percent synthetic crude oil [SCO] from mining).

This assessment addresses three types of WCSB oil sands crude oils that are extracted either by mining or the in situ thermal processes.
Conventional strip-mining methods are used to extract oil sands deposits that are less than about 75 meters below the surface.[^17]

[^17:] Mining accounts for roughly 48 percent of total bitumen capacity in the WCSB oil sands as of mid-2010 (IEA 2010, p. 152).

To recover deeper deposits of oil sands, in situ methods are used.
In situ recovery methods typically involve injecting steam into an oil sands reservoir to heat---and thus decrease the viscosity of---the bitumen, enabling it to flow out of the reservoir sand matrix to collection wells.
Steam is injected using cyclic steam stimulation (CSS), where the same well cycles between periods of steam injection and bitumen production, or by steam-assisted gravity drainage (SAGD), where a pair of horizontal wells is drilled.
The top well is used for steam injection, and the bottom well for bitumen production.
Due to the high energy demands for steam production, steam injection in situ methods are generally more GHG-intensive than mining operations.
The WCSB crude oil types assessed in this study are described briefly below:

• Synthetic crude oil---SCO is produced from bitumen via a refinery conversion of heavy hydrocarbons to lighter hydrocarbons.
While SCO can be sour, it is usually a light, sweet crude oil without heavy fractions.

• Dilbit (diluted bitumen)---Dilbit is bitumen blended with a diluent, usually a natural gas liquid such as condensate, to create a "lighter" product and to reduce viscosity so the dilbit can be transported via pipeline.
Dilbit feedstock processing requires more heavy oil conversion capacity than most crude oils.

• Synthetic bitumen (synbit) ---Synbit is usually a combination of bitumen and SCO.
The properties of synbit blends vary greatly, but blending lighter SCO with heavier bitumen results in a product more similar to conventional crude oil than SCO or dilbit alone.

The reference crudes evaluated in the literature reflect a range of sources and GHG emissions:

• The average U.S. barrel consumed in 2005 (NETL 2008).
This reference was selected because it provides a baseline for fuels produced from the average crude consumed in the United States.

• Venezuela Bachaquero and Mexico Maya, which are representative of heavy crudes currently refined in PADD 3 refineries.
It is assumed that these crude oils would be displaced or replaced by the WCSB oil sands crude oil that would be transported by the proposed Project, although it is likely that they would find markets elsewhere and would still be produced.

• Saudi Light (i.e., Middle Eastern Sour), which is considered the balancing grade for world crude oil supplies.
This crude may ultimately be backed out of the world market if additional supply of WCSB oil sands crudes is produced.

### Evaluation of Key Factors Influencing the GHG Results

There are many differences in the study design factors and input assumptions for life-cycle GHG analyses of WCSB oil sands crude oils relative to the four reference crude oils.

Study Design Factors

Study design factors relate to how the GHG comparison is structured within each study.
These factors include the overall purpose and goal of the study, the types of crudes and refined products that are compared to each other, the timeframe over which the results of the study are applicable, the life-cycle boundaries established to make the comparison, the functional units or the basis used for comparing the life-cycle GHGs for crudes or fuels to each other (e.g., expressing GHG emissions per unit of crude, SCO, all refined products, or specific refined products such as gasoline or diesel, in terms of volume, energy, or distance units), and the treatment of co-products other than gasoline, diesel, and jet fuels (e.g., asphalt, petroleum coke, liquefied refinery gases, and lubricants).
Some studies allocate a fraction of the GHG emissions from refining to these co-products and exclude these emissions from the life-cycle boundary (i.e., they are not included within the studies' LCA results).
Other studies include these emissions but assign credits for GHG emissions from other sources that are offset by combustion of the co-products (e.g., electricity exported from a refinery replaces natural gas-fired power generation, and petroleum coke from a refinery replaces coal).

Key design factors across the studies identified through this assessment are summarized in Table 4.15-21.
In general, the studies reviewed are consistent in their treatment of some factors (e.g., generally excluding emissions associated with land-use changes) but, as noted above, vary in their treatment of other factors (e.g., emissions from petroleum coke and electricity cogeneration).
Emissions arising from the construction of capital infrastructure are also generally excluded.

Most studies exclude land-use change, although recent studies have sought to characterize land- use carbon flows to examine the implications for GHG emissions and carbon sequestration (Rooney et al. 2012; Yeh et al. 2010).
Comparing only those portions of the two papers that focus on peatland soil carbon loss, the results were within a similar range (384 to 1,600 metric tons of carbon per hectare for Rooney compared to 778 to 1,067 metric tons of carbon per hectare for Yeh).
These Rooney and Yeh estimates are equivalent to the annual GHG emissions from fuels combustion in approximately 293 to 1,222 and 594 to 815 passenger vehicles, respectively.[^18]

[^18:] Equivalencies based on USEPA's GHG Equivalency Calculator (USEPA 2012c).

The range in Rooney et al. (2012) is larger because the authors gave a wide range for the value of peatland soil carbon storage whereas Yeh et al. (2010) explicitly included estimates of aboveground carbon sequestration in addition to soil carbon sequestration.

Given the slight differences in the two approaches, the results are reasonably consistent with each other.
Rooney et al. (2012) estimated GHG emissions and reduced carbon sequestration capacity from landscape changes due to currently approved mines.
In absolute terms, Rooney et al. (2012) found that land use changes for approved oil-sands development could release 11.4 to 47.3 million metric tons (or 68 to 283 metric tons of carbon per hectare) of stored carbon and reduce future sequestration by 5,734 to 7,241 metric tons of carbon per year (or 34 to 43 kg of carbon per hectare), but the authors did not relate these effects to life-cycle GHG emissions associated with extraction, upgrading, transportation, refining, and combustion of refined products from oil sands-derived crudes.
The primary driver for the release of stored carbon from land use change in Alberta is the replacement of carbon-rich peatland (containing 530 to 1,650 metric tons of carbon per hectare) with relatively low carbon post-mining soils (containing 50 to 146 metric tons of carbon per hectare).
In three of the mines examined in Rooney et al. (2012), 67 percent of the peatlands were reclaimed; this land conversion proportion was then scaled by the total area permitted for oil sands mining to estimate the peatland loss for the entire region studied.
The uncertainty in the carbon release estimate is derived from the wide range of carbon storage values for both the peatland and the post-mining soil.

The land disturbance emissions impact estimated by Yeh et al. (2010) was between 260 and 1,691 metric tons of carbon per hectare for surface mining production and between 6 and 135 metric tons of carbon per hectare for in situ.[^19]

[^19:] The energy yields estimated by Yeh et al. for oil sands mining and in situ extraction were 0.92 petajoules per hectare and 3.3 petajoules per hectare, respectively.

The authors found that land use contributes to <0.4 percent of WTW life-cycle GHGs from in situ oil sands production, and between 0.9 to 2.5 percent of surface mining production over a 150-year modeling period.
The larger contribution to surface mining life-cycle GHG emissions is due to the larger land use change impacts of these operations and that reclamation efforts may replace much of the disturbed peatland environment with upland forests that have lower stocks of carbon and do not provide long-term carbon sequestration benefits (Yeh et al. 2010).

Importantly, only a few studies modeled the effect that upgrading SCO has on downstream GHG emissions at the refinery.
Several (but not all) studies include the following:

• Upstream production of purchased fuels and electricity used to power machinery in the oil fields and at refineries;

• Flaring and venting;

• Fugitive emissions; and

• Methane emissions from oil sands mining and tailings ponds.

Input Assumptions

Impact LCA results and assumptions are input at each life-cycle stage.
Due to limited data availability and the complexity of and variation in the practices used to extract, process, refine, and transport crude oil, studies often use simplified assumptions to model GHG emissions.
For example, for both WCSB oil sands crude oils and reference crude oils, assumptions about how much petroleum coke is produced, stored, and combusted at the upgrader or refinery, and how much is sold to other users, are key drivers of GHG emission estimates.
Transportation Draft Supplemental Environmental Impact Statement Keystone XL Project assumptions have a more limited effect, but vary across the studies.
The following are key input assumptions for WCSB oil sands-derived crude oils:

• Type of extraction process (i.e., mining or in situ production);

• Steam-oil ratio assumed for in situ operations;

• Efficiency of steam generation, and thus its energy consumption; and

• Upgrading processes modeled for SCO and whether or not estimated refinery GHG emissions account for upgrading.

For the reference crudes, key input assumptions include the oil-water and gas-oil ratios used to estimate reinjection and venting or flaring assumptions (e.g., stranded gas versus recovered gas, control levels on venting sources, the allocation of venting/flaring emissions to crude versus produced natural gas), and whether and what type of artificial lift (e.g., gas lift, water, steam, CO2 flood) is considered for extracting crude oil.
Life-cycle GHG emissions for gasoline produced from WCSB oil sands crude oils relative to other reference crude oils consumed in the United States, as reported by NETL (2009) are summarized in Table 4.15-22.
The results are subject to several input assumptions that influence the results of the analysis.
These assumptions and their estimated scale of impact on the WTW results are summarized in the last two columns of Table 4.15-22.

For example, NETL (2009) developed its weighted-average GHG emission estimate for oil sands extraction (including upgrading) from data on mining and cyclic steam stimulation (CCS) in situ operations in 2005 and 2006.
The estimate that the NETL study used for mining oil sands was based on a 2005 industry report that estimates higher values than more recent estimates of surface mining GHG emissions (TIAX 2009; Jacobs 2009, 2012).
The in situ GHG estimate is based on a CSS operation which, while CSS operations tend to be more GHG intensive than SAGD processes, is generally in the range of in situ estimates in other studies (e.g., TIAX 2009; Jacobs 2009).
The NETL study, however, did not account for the fact that natural gas condensate is blended with crude bitumen to form dilbit, which is transported via pipeline to the United States.
Since condensate has a lower GHG intensity than crude bitumen, per-barrel GHG emissions from dilbit are less than per-barrel emissions from crude bitumen.

The NETL study only considered combustion emissions from gasoline, diesel, and kerosene-type jet fuel and allocated the refinery emissions from co-products other than gasoline, diesel, and jet fuel to the co-products themselves.
This approach removes the GHG emissions associated with producing and combusting co-products from the study's life-cycle boundary.
This approach is consistent with DOE/NETL's objective of estimating the contribution of crude oil sources to the 2005 baseline GHG emissions profile for three transportation fuels (gasoline, diesel, and kerosene-type jet fuel).
The treatment of co-products, in particular petroleum coke, can have an important effect on comparisons of the results of life-cycle assessments.
Petroleum coke, discussed in further detail below, is produced by thermal decomposition of vacuum residuum into lighter hydrocarbons during bitumen upgrading and crude oil refining.
It is approximately 95 percent carbon by weight.
Heavier crudes would produce a larger fraction of coke than lighter fuels.
Venezuela Bachaquero, Mexican Maya, and dilbit produce about 50 percent more coke than average U.S. 2005 crude or Saudi light crude (TIAX 2009).
SCO has had all the vacuum residuum removed in the upgrader before it reaches the refinery, and thereby has no petroleum coke manufacture in downstream refineries or petroleum coke transportation and combustion as do the average U.S. barrel, Mexican, Venezuelan, or Saudi reference crude oils.

The fates of petroleum coke are influenced by market effects, and differ depending on whether petroleum coke is produced at WCSB oil sands facilities in Alberta or at U.S. refineries in the Gulf Coast.
In Alberta, petroleum coke produced from partial refining (upgrading) of oil sands crudes is either stockpiled or combusted for process heat and electricity.
If stockpiled, the carbon contained in the coke is temporarily sequestered.
Data from planned and operational upgraders in Alberta show that gasification of petroleum coke and other heavy ends at these facilities substantially increases GHG emissions ((S&T)2 Consultants 2008); however, the extent of consumption of petroleum coke at WCSB oil sands facilities may be influenced by the availability of low-cost natural gas to these facilities (Brandt 2011).

At U.S. refineries in the Gulf Coast, petroleum coke is shipped to overseas markets, primarily China where it is ultimately combusted as a fuel in industrial or electric power applications.
Transporting raw or diluted bitumen to refineries in the Gulf Coast that sell coke to other markets may therefore cause a greater share of the coke to be consumed rather than stockpiled.
As explained in more detail in Appendix W, Life-Cycle Greenhouse Gas Emissions, on GHG emissions, petroleum coke produced at the upgrader and not the Gulf Coast refineries may be offset by additional coal or fuel oil combustion in the market currently filled with Gulf Coast refinery petroleum coke; however, the net emissions from coke production and combustion at the upgrader would be much smaller (Appendix W, Life-Cycle Greenhouse Gas Emissions).

As a result, the effect of including petroleum coke combustion depends upon study assumptions about the end use of petroleum coke at both the refinery and upgrader, and whether petroleum coke use offsets other fuels, such as coal or fuel oil.
These factors, in turn, depend on market interactions involving the supply of petroleum coke relative to the availability of other competing fuel substitutes.
These dynamic market effects are difficult to characterize and are generally not explicitly modeled in existing LCAs (Brandt 2011, Jacobs 2012).
These issues are discussed further in the Petroleum Coke Characteristics, GHG Emissions, and Market Effects section below.

Additionally, the NETL study used linear relationships to relate GHG emissions from refining operations to specific crudes based on API gravity and sulfur content.
The study notes that these relationships do not account for the fact that bitumen blends (dilbits and synbits) and SCO in particular would produce different fractions of residuum and light ends than full-range crudes.
Accounting for the variable properties of these crude oil types and resulting refinery GHG emissions would change the differences between WTW GHG emissions for premium fuels refined from WCSB oil sands derived crude oils relative to reference crude oils.

### Petroleum Coke Characteristics, GHG Emissions, and Market Effects

The Final EIS, released in August 2011, found that the treatment of petroleum coke in LCA studies was an important factor that influences the life-cycle GHG emission results.
It is important when comparing oil sands and the reference crudes that the full life-cycle is evaluated, not just the upstream or refining stage.
The issue of petroleum coke is not a standalone issue for oil sands crudes; it is also an LCA consideration for the heavy conventional crudes.
If the GHG emissions for the production and combustion of petroleum coke and other co-products are included within life-cycle boundaries for one type of crude, it must be done for the other crudes for an even comparison.

Producing a barrel of premium fuels (i.e., gasoline, diesel, and kerosene/jet fuel) from bitumen produces roughly the same amount of petroleum coke as a barrel of premium fuels refined from heavy crudes, such as Venezuelan Bachaquero or Mexican Maya.
The actual net GHG emissions from petroleum coke, however, depend on the final end use of the petroleum coke (i.e., whether it is stockpiled or combusted) and how its end use affects demand for other fuels such as coal.
Since a portion of the petroleum coke produced from upgrading WCSB oil sands bitumen is currently stockpiled and not combusted, whereas the petroleum coke produced from refining reference crudes at Gulf Coast refineries is combusted, GHG emissions from petroleum coke produced from WCSB oil sands crudes are slightly lower than petroleum coke GHG emissions from other heavy reference crudes.

Recent reports published since the Final EIS (Oil Change International 2013, Gordon 2012) have also recognized petroleum coke as an important source of GHG emissions in the crude oil life- cycle.
To better understand the importance of petroleum coke in the life-cycle of both oil-sands-derived and reference crudes, this section describes:

• Petroleum coke characteristics relative to coal, for which it serves as a substitute in the electric power sector;

• The effect of including petroleum coke production and combustion in life-cycle GHG emission estimates of oil sands and other reference crudes; and,

• Market effects related to changes in the petroleum coke production, how these effects have been captured in existing LCA studies, likely markets for petroleum coke, and potential effects on the demand for other fuels.

Physical characteristics of petroleum coke are provided in Table 4.15-23, including heating value (on a higher heating value basis),[^20] carbon content, and CO2 emissions per unit energy.
For comparison purposes, these characteristics are also provided for bituminous, sub-bituminous, lignite, and anthracite types of coal.
The change in CO2-intensity for these coals is provided relative to petroleum coke on an energy basis.
Table 4.15-23 shows that bituminous, sub- bituminous, and lignite coal are between about 4 and 9 percent less CO2-intensive than petroleum coke on an energy basis, while anthracite coal is approximately 2 percent more CO2-intensive.

[^20:] The heating value is the amount of heat released during the combustion of a specified amount of a substance, and the higher heating value is determined by bringing all the products of combustion back to the original pre-combustion temperature.

Recent reports (Oil Change International 2013, Gordon 2012) have critiqued existing LCA studies for allocating GHG emissions from producing and combusting petroleum coke outside the study boundaries, or for assuming that petroleum coke combustion substitutes or offsets coal combustion.
Defined pathways for individual products are the cornerstone of LCA, and must be appropriate to the study's goal and scope.
For example, NETL excluded GHG emissions from petroleum coke production and combustion because they are outside the boundary of premium fuel products (i.e., gasoline, diesel, and kerosene/jet fuel) (NETL 2008, 2009).
This approach is consistent with the study's goal of estimating the contribution of crude oil sources to the 2005 baseline emissions profile for premium fuels.

**Table 4.15-23 Petroleum Coke and Coal Heating Values, Carbon Contents, and CO2 Emissions per Unit Energy from USEPA (2012b)**

**Characteristic Units Petroleum Coke**

**Bituminous Coal**

**Sub-bituminous Coal**

**Lignite Coal**

**Anthracite Coal**

Heating valuea million Btu/ short ton

30.12b 23.89c 17.14 c 12.87 c 22.57 c

Carbon contentd % carbon, by weight

92% 67% 50% 38% 70%

CO2 emissions per unit energy kgCO2/ million Btu

102.10e 93.27f 97.17f 97.67f 103.67f grams CO2/MJ 96.77 88.40 92.10 92.57 98.26

**Change in emissions- intensity relative to petroleum coke**

**% change -- -9% -5% -4% 2%**

Notes: Data in table reflects national characteristics provided by USEPA (2012b) U.S. Inventory of Greenhouse Gas Emissions: 1990-2010.
Original sources cited in USEPA (2012b) are provided below. a On a higher heating value basis. b EIA (2010).
Annual Energy Review 2009.
U.S. Energy Information Administration. c EIA (1993).
State Energy Report 1992.
U.S. Energy Information Administration. c Calculated from heating value and CO2 emissions per unit energy. e Based on data sourced from EIA (1994), EIA (2009), USEPA (2009) and USEPA (2010a) f Calculated from USGS (1998) and PSU (2010); data presented in USEPA (2010b)

Other LCA studies do not exclude the GHG emissions from the production and combustion of petroleum coke and other co-products that leave the system boundary.
Instead, these studies typically apply a substitution credit for the fuels that are offset in other markets by the use of petroleum coke and other co-products.
To calculate the credit, studies generally assume one-to-one substitution on an energy basis (i.e., one Btu of coal is offset by one Btu of petroleum coke).
Although some studies have assumed that the net GHG emissions from offsetting coal for coke are negligible (IHS CERA 2012), other studies have accounted for the fact that petroleum coke has a higher CO2 intensity on an energy basis when compared to bituminous and sub-bituminous coal.
For example, Jacobs found this net difference to be approximately 8 g CO2/MJ (plus a small, unspecified adjustment to account for transportation of coke versus coal) (Jacobs 2009 p. 8-3); the most recent Jacobs report assumed that offsetting the combustion of coal with petroleum coke results in a small incremental net increase of approximately 2 g CO2/MJ (Jacobs 2012, p. 9-12).

Since the treatment of petroleum coke and other co-products has a large effect on WTW GHG emissions, it is important to ensure that consistent system boundaries are applied when comparing GHG emissions from WCSB oil sands crudes to other reference crudes.
For example, the GHG emissions from oil sands extraction and upgrading have been estimated as 3.2 to 4.5 times higher than conventional oil production (Oil Change International 2013; Huot 2011), but this comparison does not describe entirely equivalent crude oil types.
The upstream LCA stage for some oil sands includes the process of upgrading, which removes the heavy coke bottom of the crude barrel.
For conventional crudes, the extraction stage does not contain the equivalent process of upgrading or coking; instead, for conventional crudes the coking process occurs within the refining stage.

Since the boundaries across different LCA studies differs depending on the goal and scope of a particular study, the change in WTW emissions from oil sands crudes relative to other reference crudes is compared on an internally-consistent basis (i.e., by comparing the relative change within studies, not across different studies) in Figures 4.15.3-3, 4.15.3-4, and 4.15.3-5, and in the incremental assessment of GHG emissions in this section.

Virtually all crude oils, light, medium and heavy, including bitumen, contain a fraction of the raw oil out of the ground that does not boil even under full vacuum conditions.
This fraction, called vacuum residuum, will thermally destruct into lower molecular weight hydrocarbon compounds and elemental carbon when heated above about 800°F.
This fraction is commonly used for three products: asphalt, residual fuel oil (called No. 6 fuel oil or bunker fuel), and petroleum coke.
The coking process takes advantage of the thermal destruction nature of vacuum residuum by heating the oil above the thermal destruction temperature and quickly discharging the hot oil into a drum where the hydrocarbons exit the top as vapors and the elemental carbon settles to the bottom as petroleum coke.

Canadian oil sands bitumen contains about 40 percent vacuum residuum fraction.
When this bitumen is blended with 30 percent diluent, creating what is referred to as dilbit, the dilbit contains about 30 percent vacuum residuum fraction.
Venezuelan Bachaquero crude contains about 40 percent vacuum residuum, and Arab Light crude contains about 20 percent vacuum residuum.
So the vacuum residuum of Canadian oil sands bitumen is within the range of crude oils commonly refined in the Gulf Coast area, which is the proposed destination of Canadian oil sands crudes transported by the proposed Project.

Domestic consumption of petroleum coke in the United States is unlikely to significantly increase, so petroleum coke exports are likely to continue, with China remaining a large importer of U.S. petroleum coke to meet its domestic energy demands.
Since the USEPA specified sulfur limits on No. 6 fuel oil (which are very hard and expensive to achieve in anything but low sulfur crude oils), the U.S. electrical power industry largely abandoned use of No. 6 fuel oil for electricity generation.
This limitation of sulfur in fuel oil did not solve the acid rain air pollution problem in the northeastern United States, so the USEPA specified SOx emissions controls on coal-fired power plants.
Flue gas stack scrubbers remove the SOx, and hence, the acid rain problem is largely resolved today.
Nevertheless, No. 6 fuel oil has not re-entered the power generation market because refineries have installed coking units to convert oil into petroleum coke.
While coke can be used as a supplement to coal in electrical power plants, with declining reliance on coal and long term contracts with coal suppliers, petroleum coke has not significantly penetrated the U.S. power plant industry.
For example, in 2011 petroleum coke consumption was equivalent to 0.5 percent of coal consumption for electricity generation across all sectors (EIA 2012b).
Most of the Gulf Coast coke is exported to markets in China, Japan, and Mexico, which accounted for 35 percent of all exports in 2011 (EIA 2012c).
China was the single largest importer of U.S. petroleum coke, accounting for approximately 14 percent of U.S. exports (EIA 2012c).

The sulfur content of petroleum coke in the United States is a consideration for coal-fired power plants as they must control SOx emissions with flue gas scrubbers.
Consideration is also given to the sulfur content of No. 6 fuel oil, but the power industry is converting to plentiful and inexpensive natural gas, and the coking assets are in place to process virtually all vacuum residuum not destined for the asphalt market.

The proposed Project will transport a mix of SCO and dilbit.[^21] Petroleum coke from the bitumen upgraded into SCO is produced at Canadian upgraders.
A significant fraction of this petroleum coke---approximately 50 to 75 percent (ERCB 2010; Oil Change International 2013, citing Alberta ERCB)---is currently stockpiled because it faces the same barriers to penetrate the Canadian coal-fired power plant market as does petroleum coke in the United States and it cannot be economically transported by rail for export to overseas markets at current market prices.

[^21:] For the purposes of this GHG Section, a 50/50 mix of SCO and dilbit is assumed, representing a conservative approach to life-cycle GHG considerations.
As described in Section 1.4, Market Analysis, there is a significant difference in the projected percentages (between the 2008 and 2012 CAPP forecasts) of the crude oil that would go to market as upgraded synthetic crude oil, the projections being 47% percent and 28% percent respectively.

The dilbit transported by the proposed Project would be transported to Gulf Coast refineries where it would produce approximately the same quantities of petroleum coke as other heavy reference crudes such as Venezuelan Bachaquero and Mexican Maya.
So of the total WCSB oil sands throughput of the proposed Project, slightly more than half of the petroleum coke is produced in Canada, where approximately 50 to 75 percent of it is currently stockpiled and the rest used as a substitute for other fuels in the production and upgrader process.
The remainder of the petroleum coke (all that is produced from the dilbit fraction and none in the SCO) is produced at Gulf Coast refineries where it is used as a fuel in domestic or overseas markets.

Petroleum refineries attempt to maximize the use of all assets.
Therefore, Gulf Coast area refineries will choose blends of Canadian oil sands crudes (dilbit, SCO, synbit) with other domestic and imported crudes to fill out the refinery assets including the coker units.
Hence, approximately the same quantity of petroleum coke would be produced from a mix of crudes that backs out imported crude oils such as Mexican Maya, Venezuelan Bachequero, and Saudi Arabian Light crudes.
The coke produced from Canadian oil sands crudes would be marketed the same as current coke; most of it would be exported with China being a large importer of U.S. petroleum coke.

The petroleum coke-associated GHG emissions from oil sands would be fundamentally similar to some heavy reference crudes given the following:

• Accounting for the non-combustion for approximately half of the upgrader petroleum coke manufacture;

• The combustion of coke manufactured from reference crude oils (including transportation to the China market);

• The lower refining emissions of SCO (because all the residuum processing was done at the upgrader); and

• The likely transportation of displaced reference crudes to alternative markets (e.g., Mexican Maya transported 10,000 miles to China rather than 700 miles to the Gulf Coast.

The oil sands petroleum coke-associated GHG emissions would likely be higher than the U.S. average barrel, especially with rapidly expanding shale oil production in North America.

While certain LCA studies developed detailed data models of oil sands production, processing, transport, and refining processes, including petroleum coke, they do not have access to the detailed data of the processes used to produce other reference crudes.
For example, all conventional crudes, such as Saudi Arab Light and most U.S. production prior to the shale oil boom, are in various stages of declining production requiring enhanced production techniques with larger energy intensities per barrel of oil produced.
As a result, the conventional crude production carbon intensity can be expected to trend upward, whereas the WCSB oil sands carbon intensity can be expected to be relatively flat since the deposits are shallow, they can be extracted using mining or near-surface in situ methods, and new production methods could potentially reduce the energy intensity.
Even Saudi Arab Light crude from the giant Ghawar field in Saudi Arabia, which is produced with a 10 million barrel per day water flood pumped from the Arabian Gulf, is rapidly increasing in water cut, such that it is possible in 10 years oil sands could be less energy intensive, well-to-wheels, than Saudi Arab Light delivered to the same Gulf Coast destination.

A large share of Gulf Coast petroleum coke is shipped to China for the following reasons:

• It is less expensive, including the shipping, than China's coal; and

• China is challenged to keep pace with its rapidly growing economy with equally rapid coal production growth.

Coal accounted for nearly half the increase in global energy use over the past decade, and China was responsible for nearly half the global coal use in 2009 (IEA 2011).
China, alongside India, is expected to lead in energy consumption growth in non-OECD[^22] Asian regions, which is projected to rise by 91 percent from 2010 to 2035 (EIA 2012d).

[^22:] Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development.

At the same time, Mexico, Venezuela, and other large petroleum producers depend heavily on their crude oil exports to support their national economies.
Just as the Market Analysis (see Section 1.4, Market Analysis) found it unlikely that the proposed Project construction would have a substantial impact on the rate of the oil sands development, these other petroleum producers are unlikely to forego crude oil sales if the U.S. substitutes Canadian oil sands crudes for Mexican and Venezuelan crudes.
They can be expected to sell their crudes for whatever price the market will bear, and that is probably to China.
Similarly, all the production and transportation assets are in place for Saudi Arabia to supply the crude oil displaced from the U.S. market to any country in the world who will buy it.

Expanding electrical power generation in China is easier and more cost-effective with No. 6 fuel oil than coal.
Both No. 6 fuel oil and coal have high sulfur contents, and China has significant air pollution problems primarily from coal power plants.
Thus, when China chooses to invest in a solution to air pollution, installing power plant flue gas scrubbers is a leading option.
That will make No. 6 fuel oil equally suitable for power generation, but more economical in new power plants than coal.
Therefore, worldwide crude oils displaced from the Gulf Coast refineries with Canadian oil sands crudes would more likely find their way to China, along with roughly the same amount of petroleum coke from the Gulf Coast, both displacing coal production in China.

Supplementing the worldwide crude oil market, Canadian oil sand crude will more likely substitute for expanded coal production in China rather than expand the use of solid carbon fuels (coal and coke) used in power generation in North America or China.
With the discovery of economic production of light, sweet crude oils from hydraulic fracturing shale, the combination of expanded light U.S. crude and heavy Canadian oil sands production would likely not alter petroleum refining assets in the Gulf Coast area with regard to coking capacity.
Refineries designed to run primarily heavy crudes may have to add facilities to pre-distill light ends from light shale oil crudes, but the remaining secondary units of the refineries (vacuum distillation unit, gas oil cracking, coking, and hydrotreating distillate products) can be expected to be protected like any asset in place.

### GHG Intensity of WCSB Crudes

The wide variation in design and input assumptions within the various studies leads to a wide divergence in calculated GHG emissions.
Based on an extensive review of information provided in the studies reviewed, the WTW and WTT GHG emission estimates of gasoline produced from WCSB oil sands-derived crude oils were compared to similar emission estimates from four reference crude oils (see Figures 4.15.3-3 and 4.15.3-4).
Additional information on the data sources and assessment is available in Appendix W, Life-Cycle Greenhouse Gas Emissions.
As shown in Figure 4.15.3-3, the NETL WTW GHG emission estimates from gasoline produced from WCSB oil sands derived crude oils are 17 percent higher than the GHG emission estimates for gasoline produced from the average mix of crude oils consumed in the United States in 2005, and are approximately 19, 13, and 16 percent higher than GHG emission estimates for Middle East Sour, Mexican Heavy (i.e., Mexican Maya), and Venezuelan[^23] crude oils, respectively (NETL 2009).
The WTW emission estimates for gasoline produced from SCO via in situ methods of oil sands extraction (i.e., SAGD and CSS) in general are higher than the GHG emission estimates for mining extraction methods (Figure 4.15.3-3).
This difference is primarily attributable to the energy requirements of producing steam as part of the in situ extraction process.

[^23:] NETL uses Venezuelan Conventional as a reference crude rather than Venezuelan Bachaquero.

Gasoline produced from dilbit generally has lower estimated GHG life-cycle emissions than gasoline produced from SCO extracted by mining and in situ methods.
This is a result of blending raw bitumen with a diluent (e.g., gas condensate) for transport via pipeline.
Diluent produces fewer GHG emissions than bitumen, so blending the two together results in lower WTW GHG emissions.
This assessment evaluates the refining of both bitumen and diluent at the refinery, since diluent would not be separated from the dilbit blend and recirculated by the proposed Project.
Wheel-to-wheel GHG emission estimates from gasoline produced from synbit, a blend of SCO and bitumen, are similar to WTW GHG emission estimates for gasoline produced from SCOs produced from bitumen extracted by either mining or in situ methods.

Similar trends were evident in the WTT GHG analyses (see Figure 4.15.3-4).
The percentage increase in WTT GHG emission estimates for gasoline produced from WCSB oil sands-derived crude oils as compared to gasoline produced from reference crudes (Figure 4.15.3-4) is much larger than the percent increases for WTW GHG emission estimates (Figure 4.15.3-3).
Most of the gasoline life-cycle WTW GHG emissions occur during the combustion stage irrespective of the feedstock (i.e., reference crude or oil sands).
Because WTT GHG emission estimates do not include the combustion phase, the differences in GHG life-cycle emissions associated with crude oil extraction and refining are emphasized; when expressing the comparison in terms of percentage increases, the same incremental differences in the numerator are divided by a smaller denominator.

The GHG emissions associated with different oil sands extraction, processing, and transportation methods vary by roughly 25 percent on a WTW basis.
Life-cycle GHG emission estimates for fuels produced from WCSB oil sands crude oils are higher than emission estimates for fuels produced from lighter crude oils, such as Middle Eastern Sour crudes and the 2005 U.S. average mix.
Compared to heavier crude oils from Mexico and Venezuela, WTW emission estimates associated with fuels derived from WCSB oil sand-derived crude oils are 37 percent higher than for SAGD SCO (petroleum coke burned at the upgrader) and 2 percent lower for mining-derived SCO (including storing or selling the petroleum coke).

Estimates from recent LCA studies are within these ranges.
A recent study by IHS CERA found that transportation fuels produced from oil sands result in average WTW GHG emissions that are 14 percent higher than the average crude refined in the United States (results range from 5 to 23 percent higher) (IHS CERA 2012).
In addition, Jacobs found that WTW GHG intensities of transportation fuels produced from oil sands are within 7 to 12 percent of the upper range of the conventional crudes WTW intensity (Jacobs 2012).

### Incremental GHG Emissions from Oil Sands Crudes Potentially Transported by the Proposed Project Compared to Reference Crudes

As noted earlier in this section, and in Section 1.4, Market Analysis, under most scenarios the proposed Project would be unlikely to substantially influence the rate or magnitude of oil extraction activities in Canada, or the overall volume of crude oil transported to the United States or refined in the United States.
Although there have been developments in the North American crude market since that analysis was completed, those developments do not alter the conclusion reached (see Section 1.4, Market Analysis).
Thus, from a global perspective, the decision whether or not to build the proposed Project would be unlikely to substantially affect the rate of extraction and combustion of WCSB oil sands crude and its impact on the global market.
On a life-cycle basis and compared with reference crudes refined in the United States, the reliance on oil sands crudes for transportation fuels would likely result in an increase in incremental GHG emissions.[^24]

[^24:] Note that a substantial share of these emissions would occur outside the United States.
Also note that the U.S. National Inventory Report, like other national inventories, only characterizes emissions within the national border, rather than using a life-cycle approach.
If the United States used a life-cycle approach, upstream emissions from other imported crudes would be attributed to the United States.

Although an LCA is not strictly necessary for evaluating the potential environmental impacts attributable to the proposed Project under NEPA, it is relevant and informative for policy makers to consider in a variety of contexts.
For illustrative purposes, this section provides information on the incremental life-cycle GHG emissions (in terms of the U.S. carbon footprint) from WCSB oil sands crudes that would likely be transported by the proposed Project (or any transboundary crude oil pipeline).
The incremental emissions are a function of:

• Throughput of the pipeline

• Mix of oil sands crudes imported

• GHG intensity of the crudes in the pipeline compared to the crudes they displace Acknowledging the methodological differences in GHG-intensity estimates among the studies, the weighted-average GHG emissions for selected studies were calculated to estimate the incremental GHG emissions from WCSB oil sands relative to displacing an equivalent volume of reference crudes in U.S. refineries.

Jacobs (2009), TIAX (2009), and NETL (2009) formed the subset of studies used to develop weighted averages for the carbon footprint analysis.
These studies are independent analyses of WTW GHG emissions from oil sands and reference crudes that use consistent functional units for comparison with each other.
The other studies included in this assessment either did not look at the full WTW fuel life cycle, did not evaluate emissions on a consistent functional unit basis for comparison, or are meta-analyses that include the results of the Jacobs and TIAX studies.
Despite the underlying differences in study assumptions, the comparisons illustrated below are internally consistent and make comparisons between crudes from the same study.
For illustrative purposes, Figure 4.15.3-5 shows the percent change in weighted-average GHG emissions from the mix of WCSB oil sands crude oil that may be transported in the proposed Project relative to each of the four reference crudes on a gasoline basis.

The change in GHG emissions is calculated for the Jacobs (2009) and TIAX (2009) values by weighting the WTW GHG intensity of individual oil sands crudes by the composition of oil sands crudes that could be transported in the proposed Project.
For this GHG life-cycle assessment, 50 percent of pipeline throughput is assumed to be SCO, and 50 percent would be dilbit.[^25]

[^25:] As described in Section 1.4, there is a significant difference in the projected percentage of that crude oil that would go to market as upgraded synthetic crude oil, 47 percent in the 2008 CAPP forecast, dropping to 28 percent in the 2012 CAPP forecast.

All WCSB dilbit is currently produced using in situ production and 12 percent of SCO is produced via in situ methods (Alberta Energy Resources Conservation Board [ERCB] 2010), yielding a final mix of 50 percent in situ-produced dilbit, 44 percent mining-produced SCO, and 6 percent in situ-produced SCO.[^26]

[^26:] Of in situ WCSB oil sands production from SAGD and CSS facilities, CSS accounts for 47 percent of production, and SAGD accounts for 53 percent.
This ratio was used to calculate an average for in situ-produced dilbit for TIAX, which provided separate estimates for CSS and SAGD dilbit.
Primary in situ production of WCSB bitumen (i.e., using conventional oil production techniques) was not included since estimates were not provided in the studies included in the scope of this assessment.
Primary production currently accounts for 32.9 thousand cubic meters per day, or 14 percent of total oil sands production (ERCB 2010).

The results are representative of near-term expected WCSB oil sands composition and GHG intensities.

The Canadian oil sands average from NETL (2009) is also plotted on Figure 4.15.3-5 for comparison with Jacobs (2009) and TIAX (2009), although the NETL result assumes a mix of 43 percent crude bitumen and 57 percent SCO.
The NETL study did not account for the fact that condensate is blended with crude bitumen to form dilbit, which is transported via pipeline to U.S. refineries.
Since condensate has a lower GHG intensity than crude bitumen, per-barrel GHG emissions from dilbit are less than per-barrel emissions from crude bitumen.
The results show a 2 to 19 percent increase in WTW GHG emissions from gasoline produced from the weighted- average mix of oil sands crudes that may be transported in the proposed Project relative to the reference crudes in the near term.
Heavier crudes generally take more energy to produce and emit more GHGs than lighter crudes, and in particular, the weighted-average WCSB oil sands crude is currently more energy- and carbon-intensive than lighter crudes like Middle Eastern Sour.

For illustrative purposes, Table 4.15-24 shows the incremental annual WTW GHG emissions associated with displacement of 100,000 barrels of each reference crude per day with WCSB oil sands crude oil using the weighted-average estimate for the mix of WCSB oil sands crudes that may be transported in the proposed Project.

**Table 4.15-24 Incremental Annual GHG Emissions of Displacing 100,000 Barrels per Day of Each Reference Crude with WCSB Oil Sands (MMTCO2ea) by Study**

**Reference Crude Jacobs 2009 TIAX 2009b NETL 2009a**

Middle Eastern Sour 1.3 2.0 2.5 Mexican Maya 0.5 1.6 1.7 Venezuelanc 0.4 0.5 2.4 U.S. Average (2005) NA NA 2.3

Note: The incremental annual GHG emissions presented here are calculated using internally consistent comparisons for each reference crude and the weighted average WCSB oil sands crude using information from each respective study.
The incremental annual GHG emissions estimates for displacing the U.S. average (2005) reference crude is only provided for NETL (2009) because only NETL included a U.S. average reference.
NA = Not Applicable. a MMTCO2e = million metric tons of CO2 equivalent. b The NETL and TIAX studies allocate a portion of GHG emission to co-products other than gasoline, diesel, and jet fuel products, which are not accounted for in these estimates.
As a result, incremental GHG emissions are underestimated for those studies. c Venezuelan conventional crude values for NETL refer to a medium crude, not the heavy crude Venezuelan Bachaquero.

The incremental GHG emissions were calculated by first multiplying the WTW GHG emission intensities per barrel of gasoline and distillates (i.e., gasoline, diesel, and kerosene/jet fuel) for WCSB and reference crudes from each study by the volume of premium fuel products produced by 100,000 barrels of WCSB oil sands crude.
WTW GHG emissions from each reference crude were then subtracted from the WTW GHG emissions from the equivalent volume of WCSB oil sands crude to estimate incremental GHG emissions.
The 100,000 barrels of crude were converted to an equivalent volume of gasoline and distillate products using yield data provided in each respective study.
As previously noted, these incremental GHG estimates provide an example of the potential effect, on a life-cycle basis, resulting from displacement of reference crude oils in PADD 3 refineries; on a global scale, the decision whether or not to build the proposed Project would not affect the extraction and combustion of WCSB oil sands crude on the global market (see Section 1.4, Market Analysis).

The incremental GHG emissions in Table 4.15-24 are compared against four different reference crude oils.
To the extent that Middle Eastern Sour is the world balancing crude (i.e., the crude oil that would most likely be replaced by WCSB crude and backed out of the global market), it may ultimately be the crude that is backed out of the world market by WCSB oil sands crudes.
From another perspective, if the proposed Project is built and the PADD 3 refineries continue using about the same input mix of heavy crudes as they currently use, Venezuelan Bachaquero or Mexican Mayan are likely to be displaced by WCSB oil sand crudes.
Finally, NETL (2009) estimated the GHG emissions intensity of the average barrel of crude oil refined in the United States in 2005.
The Jacobs and TIAX studies are not compared to this reference crude because they did not include a U.S. average estimate.

The three studies referenced in Table 4.15-24 used different methods to allocate GHG emissions between premium fuels (e.g., gasoline, diesel, and jet fuel) and other co-products (e.g., light and heavy ends, petroleum coke, sulfur).
Jacobs (2009) attributes all GHG emissions associated with extracting, refining, and distributing other co-products to premium fuels;[^27] thus, the incremental GHG emissions shown for Jacobs (2009) in Table 4.15-24 take into account the production and use of these co-products.

[^27:] Jacobs (2009) also applies a substitution credit for offsetting other products that are replaced by each of the co-products.
For example, the production and use of petroleum coke is assumed to offset GHG emissions from coal- fired electricity production.

As noted elsewhere in the Supplemental EIS, the near-term initial throughput of the proposed Project is projected to be 830,000 barrels of crude per day with 100,000 bpd supplied by Bakken crude production and the remaining 730,000 bpd supplied by the WCSB oil sands.
However, assuming that the full 830,000 bpd capacity of the pipeline is used to transport only WCSB crude, and based on the results in the Jacobs (2009) study, incremental GHG emissions from the proposed Project would be 11.1 MMTCO2e if the oil sands crude oil transported by the proposed Project offset an equivalent amount of Middle Eastern Sour crude oil.
Incremental emissions would be 4.4 MMTCO2e annually if oil sands crude oil offset Mexican Maya crude oil and 3.3 MMTCO2e annually if Venezuela Bachaquero crude oil were offset.

Unlike the Jacobs study, the TIAX and NETL studies allocate a portion of GHG emissions to co-products other than gasoline, diesel, and jet fuel products, and these emissions are not included in the studies' WTW GHG results.
As a result, the incremental GHG emissions estimates for TIAX and NETL in Table 4.15-24 may underestimate total incremental GHG emissions.[^28]

[^28:] Adjusting the TIAX and NETL GHG emission estimates to include co-products other than gasoline, diesel, and kerosene/jet fuel would require two pieces of information: 1) the GHG intensity of the other products, for both WCSB crudes and reference crudes, and 2) the yield of the other products, for both WCSB crudes and reference crudes.
TIAX (2009) and NETL (2008) do not provide explicit emissions intensity factors or product yields in a format that enables separate emissions estimates to be developed for these products.
These products largely comprise the remaining fractions of the input crude that cannot be converted into premium products.

TIAX (2009) found that the change in refinery energy use associated with an incremental barrel output of co-products other than gasoline, diesel, and jet fuel contributed to less than one percent of energy use and GHG emissions per barrel of refined product at the refinery, so any error introduced by the underestimate of GHG emissions attributed to co-products is negligible.
According to the results of the TIAX study, incremental GHG emissions from the portion of WCSB oil sands crudes transported by the proposed Project would be 16.7 MMTCO2e if oil sands crude oil offset an equivalent amount of Middle Eastern Sour crude oil.
Incremental emissions would be 13.4 MMTCO2e and 4.0 MMTCO2e annually if oil sands crudes offset Mexican Maya and Venezuelan Bachaquero crude oil, respectively.

Based on the results of NETL (2009), incremental emissions from the portion of WCSB oil sands crudes transported by the proposed Project would be 20.8 MMTCO2e annually if oil sands crude oil offset an equivalent amount of Middle Eastern Sour crude oil.
Incremental emissions would be 13.8 MMTCO2e and 19.5 MMTCO2e annually if oil sands crudes offset Mexican Maya and Venezuelan Bachaquero crude oil, respectively.
Compared to the average barrel of crude refined in the United States in 2005, incremental emissions from oil sands crudes would be 18.7 MMTCO2e annually.

The effect of allocating a portion of the life-cycle GHG emissions of refining crude oils to other, non-premium co-products was larger in the NETL study than in either of the studies by Jacobs (which did not allocate any emissions to other co-products) or TIAX (which allocated less than 1 percent of GHG emissions at the refinery to other co-products).
To estimate the magnitude of this effect, the NETL results for WCSB oil sands and the 2005 U.S. average crude oils were adjusted to include other product emissions modeled in NETL's analysis.
The lead NETL study author was contacted to vet the approach used to make this adjustment in order to ensure that it was made consistently with the NETL study framework (Personal communication, Timothy Skone 2011).
Adjusting the NETL results to include other product emissions could increase the differential in incremental emissions from WCSB oil sands compared to the 2005 U.S. average crude oils by roughly 30 percent.

The full range of incremental GHG emissions associated with the displacement of the reference crudes by the WCSB oil sands crude estimated from the quoted subset of studies is 3.3 to 20.8 MMTCO2e annually.
This is equivalent to annual GHG emissions from fuels combustion in approximately 770,800 to 4,312,500 passenger vehicles or the CO2 emissions from combusting fuels used to provide the energy consumed by approximately 190,400 to 1,065,400 homes for one year.[^29]

[^29:] Equivalencies based on USEPA's GHG Equivalency calculator (USEPA 2012c).

Section 1.4, Market Analysis, concludes construction of the proposed Project is unlikely to have a substantial impact on the development rate of the WCSB oil sands, and that even when considering the incremental cost of non-pipeline transport options, should the proposed Project be denied, a 0.4 to 0.6 percent reduction in WCSB production could occur by 2030, and in the scenario of all pipeline projects not being built, a 2 to 4 percent decrease in WCSB oil sands production could occur.
This infers that of the 3.3 to 20.8 MMTCO2e annual incremental GHG emissions, the proposed Project would be responsible for incremental GHG emissions in the range of 0.07 to 0.83 MMTCO2e annually, and in the scenario where all pipelines were not constructed, the incremental GHG emissions would be 0.35 to 5.3 MMTCO2e annually.[^30]

[^30:] In 2010, U.S. GHG emissions totaled 6,821.8 MMTCO2e (excluding emissions/removals from Land use, land-use change, and forestry) (USEPA 2012b).
In 2010, global CO2 emissions from fuel combustion were 30,326 MMCO2e (IEA 2012).

The differentials presented here are based on life-cycle emission estimates for current or near-term conditions in the world oil market, as can be seen from the reference years used in each report.
Over time, however, the GHG emission estimates for fuels derived from both WCSB oil sands crude oils and the reference crude oils are likely to change.

GHG emissions from the production phase for reference crude oils may become more energy- intensive over time due to the need to extract oil from deeper reservoirs by using more energy- intensive secondary and tertiary recovery techniques, such as CO2 flood.
Many of the reference crude oil reservoirs are 1 to 2 miles (or more) underground or under the ocean floor and exploration efforts for new deep oil reservoirs would continue as known reservoirs continue to deplete.

In contrast, the extent of the WCSB oil sands deposits is well understood and defined, where the deposits are much shallower and can be extracted using either surface mining or near-surface in situ methods.
In the future, in situ extraction methods are projected to represent a larger share of the overall oil sands production, increasing from about 45 percent of 2009 oil sands production to an estimated 53 percent by 2030 (ERCB 2010).
In particular, the share of SAGD in situ extraction methods are projected to rise from roughly 18 percent in 2009 to 40 percent of oil sands production in 2030 (IHS CERA 2011).[^31]

[^31:] Although the balance of mining and in situ extraction would change in the future, there are incentives for producers to keep GHG intensity as low as possible.
For example, Alberta's climate policy requires that oil sands producers and other large industrial GHG emitters reduce their emissions intensity by 12 percent from an established baseline.

The GHG profile of this more energy-intensive oil sands extraction method may be reduced by new technologies and innovations to reuse steam onsite and/or improve thermal recovery.
However, surface mining is projected to remain a significant extraction method for WCSB crude oils for the next 20 years (IHS CERA 2010, 2011).
Considering these factors, GHG intensity for future reference crude oils may trend upward while the GHG intensity for WCSB oil sands-derived crude oils may be relatively constant to slightly upward.
If this is the case, the differential in life-cycle GHG emissions for fuels refined from these crude oils may decrease.

### Conclusions

The studies show conclusively that combustion (i.e., tank-to-wheels) phase of the fuel life-cycle dominates the total GHG life-cycle emissions under all scenarios.
Overall, it is clear that comparisons of GHG life-cycle emission estimates for fuels derived from different sources are sensitive to the choice of boundaries, consistent application of boundary conditions within studies, and to key input parameters.
In particular, the results depend on assumptions regarding the uses of petroleum coke at oil sands facilities and at U.S. refineries, and upon the weighted- average mix of WCSB oil sands crude transported to the United States by the proposed Project or some other transboundary pipeline.
SAGD and CSS in situ production methods are generally more GHG-intensive than mining, and while SCO requires upgrading prior to pipeline transport, bitumen blends such as dilbit and synbit require additional refining emissions and do not produce an equivalent amount of premium fuel products per barrel input.

Despite the differences in study design and input assumptions, it is clear that WCSB crudes, as would likely be transported through the proposed Project, are on average somewhat more GHG- intensive than the crudes they would displace in the U.S. refineries.
As discussed in Section 1.4, Market Analysis, there would be no substantive change in global GHG emissions and, as explained in Section 4.15.3, Cumulative Impacts by Resource, there would likely be no substantial change in WCSB imports to PADD 3 with or without the proposed Project in the medium to long-term, the life-cycle GHG emissions associated with transportation fuels produced in U.S. refineries would increase if WCSB crude oils replace existing heavy crude oil sources for PADD 3.

It is also noted that the GHG intensity of reference crudes may increase in the future as more of the world crude supply requires extraction by increasingly energy intensive tertiary and enhanced oil recovery techniques,[^32] although the latter can be in part act as a sequestration method.
The energy intensity of surface-mined Canadian crudes would likely be relatively constant while higher energy intensive in situ production may increase somewhat; the proportion of in situ extraction is forecast to increase relative to the less energy-intensive surface mining.
Although there is some uncertainty in the trends for both reference crudes and oil sands derived crude oils, on balance the gap in GHG intensity is likely to decrease over time.

[^32:] As with the producers of oil sands, however, in some cases producers of reference crudes are likely to face regulatory pressures or other incentives to lower the GHG intensity of their production process.
Such a dynamic would counter the trend toward higher GHG intensities.

### GHG Mitigation

The Government of Alberta has worked to mitigate and reduce the GHG emissions associated with oil sands production.
In 2008, the Government of Alberta revised its Climate Change Strategy which aims to reduce 200 MMTCO2e of GHG emissions by 2050.[^33]

[^33:] In addition to mitigation initiatives, it is also worth noting that in September 2012 the Environmental ministers for Canada and Alberta together announced a joint environmental monitoring system of oil sands production that would include, among others, increased frequency of monitoring in the oil sands region, a doubling of the number of monitoring stations, and making data publicly available.

The strategy focuses three main policy initiatives as follows:

• First, the Climate Change and Emissions Management Act, enacted in 2003, establishes mandatory annual GHG intensity reduction targets for large industrial GHG emitters.
Those emitters that fall short can either purchase credits from other companies that have reduced their emissions, or pay $15 for every metric ton of CO2e above their target into a government-run clean energy technology fund (Government of Alberta 2010a).

• Second, the Government of Alberta has dedicated $1.55 billion to fund three large-scale CCS projects.
Of these three projects, one involves oil sands producers.
This project is expected to reduce 15.2 million metric tons of CO2e per year (Government of Alberta 2012).

• Third, the funds collected as part of the Climate Change and Emissions Management Act are placed in the Climate Change and Emissions Management Fund, which is dedicated to investing in clean energy projects (Government of Alberta 2011a).
In 2011 companies paid $55.4 million into the fund (Government of Alberta 2011b).
Several projects selected for funding in 2011 focus on energy efficiency improvements and cleaner energy production at oil sands production facilities (Climate Change and Emissions Management Corporation 2010).
CCS is expected to contribute 70 percent of the reductions, conservation and efficient energy use would contribute to 12 percent reduction, and greening energy production would contribute 18 percent (Government of Alberta 2008).
Other GHG mitigation policy proposals could establish some form of broad fiscal or regulatory national GHG reduction policy that would incentivize or regulate lower GHG emissions from oil sands operations and other sectors of the economy.
Canada is committed to meeting its emission reduction target under the Cancun Agreements of 17 percent below 2005 levels by 2020 using various approaches including provincial carbon taxes, cap and trade, feed-in tariffs, and regulatory approach by sector.
Federal oil and gas sector GHG regulations are under development and draft regulations are expected in 2013.
Additionally the Government of Canada is working with Alberta on a Joint Canada-Alberta implementation plan for oil sands monitoring which commits both governments to implement scientifically rigorous and comprehensive environmental monitoring programs (United Nations [UNFCC] 2012).
