executive Summary tAr SAndS invASion: how dirty And exPenSive oil
from cAnAdA threAtenS AmericA'S new enerGy economy

The oil industry is currently planning a massive project to export mil-
lions of barrels more per day of dirty tar sands oil from Alberta to
the United States. Tar sands mining and drilling in Canada's Boreal
Forest is the largest and most destructive project on earth. The
decline of demand for oil and the rise of alternative energy put North
America on the verge of a phenomenally important step forward toward
a new energy economy. Expanding reliance on tar sands is unnecessary,
undermines our progress, and moves us backward instead of forward.

tar Sands are dirty and expensive Canadian tar sands deposits are
found primarily under Alberta's Boreal Forest and wetlands in an area
about the size of Florida.4 In order to access it, millions of acres
of pristine forest and wildlife habitat are strip-mined and drilled,
destroying sensitive habitat and disrupting critical terrestrial carbon
reservoirs in the peatlands of the Boreal Forest. Because it requires
large amounts of energy, production of synthetic crude oil from tar
sands is estimated to release at least three times the greenhouse
gas emissions per barrel as compared to production of conventional
crude oil.5

In addition to its high carbon costs, tar sands oil production
requires two to five barrels of water for each barrel of bitumen ex-
tracted,6 has already created over 50 square miles of toxic waste
ponds,7 threatens the health of downstream indigenous com- munities,8
and is likely to cause the loss of millions of migratory birds that
nest in the forests and wetlands of the region.9

tar Sands oil has real impacts in America The United States is the
main consumer of tar sands oil. 60% of the 1.34 million barrels of tar
sands oil being produced daily in Canada are exported to the United
States, and oil companies are aiming to expand production to as much
as 3.5 million barrels per day (mbd) by 2025.10

In America, oil and pipeline companies plan to build an exten-
sive tar sands pipeline and refinery infrastructure that will lock
the United States into reliance on this high-carbon fossil fuel for
decades. This investment commitment conflicts with tackling global
warming and shifting the U.S. transportation sector to cleaner
alternatives. Further, pipelines bring a danger of oil spills to
America's agricultural heartland, while pollution from refiner- ies
would threaten local communities and the Great Lakes. All of these
environmental consequences are unnecessary because, due to declining
demand and improving energy efficiency, the United States does not
need tar sands oil.

Security lies in reducing dependence on oil The best climate security
policy is to aggressively implement en- ergy efficiency and other
measures that reduce oil dependency. These and other measures stand
to reduce U.S. demand for oil by four million barrels per day by 2020
and ten million barrels per day by 2030, which would make expansion
of tar sands

Syncrude tar sands mining operation.

 unnecessary for U.S. fuel needs.11 Given the climate security risks
 associated with development of the tar sands and other high-carbon
 fuels, we should focus on cleaner, low carbon alternatives.

Further, tar sands oil cannot enhance energy security in the
United States because it is too expensive and there is not enough
of it. Producing tar sands oil will not break the power of OPEC,
which controls the world oil market. Tar sands can- not compete in
a world of low oil prices; in fact, oil from tar sands is among the
most expensive anywhere. Tar sands would not help in the event of
an embargo or natural disaster that disrupts supply, because the tar
sands industry carries no spare capacity.

Solutions for Stopping the tar Sands invasion There are serious costs
and consequences to the United States in encouraging tar sands oil
expansion. Fortunately, there are solutions that policy-makers and
business leaders can put in place now.

Stop expansion of tar sands oil production in Canada. „ Build no more
tar sands pipelines and refineries in the United States. „ Continue
to reduce demand for oil as a transportation fuel. „ Don't spend
taxpayer dollars on buying tar sands oil. „ Eliminate tar sands
oil subsidies and financing. „ Adopt corporate policies that say
no to tar sands oil. „

A better way forward As the world's largest oil consumer, the United
States has choices about its energy future. America currently consumes
a quarter of the world's oil supply. We can and must do better.

Surely a nation this innovative and motivated can find a way to
maintain mobility, while at the same time acting to halt ex- pansion
of expensive and dirty fuels such as tar sands oil that cause global
warming and so many other environmental and health impacts. The
solutions lie in clean, renewable fuel sources, energy efficient
technology and smart growth.

Athabasca River near Fort Chipewyan, Alberta

The solutions lie in clean, renewable fuel sources, energy efficient
technology and smart growth.
