**Executive Summary**

1. TransCanada, a foreign company engaged in the business of oil
transportation by pipeline holds itself out as a leader in the
development and operation of North American energy infrastructure. The
company proposes a Keystone pipeline which, when built, will be a
1,833 mile long pipeline that transports crude oil from Hardisty,
Alberta, across Montana, South Dakota, Nebraska, including a portion
of the Nebraska Sandhills and Ogallala Aquifer, Kansas, Missouri, and
Oklahoma with a terminus at Cushing, Oklahoma. There the transported
oil will connect with another pipeline system and move to Port Arthur,
Texas, to be processed and sold on the international oil market.

2. The pipeline will pass through an area of Nebraska not now
punctuated by oil pipeline structures. The area to be crossed includes
the pristine Ogallala Aquifer and the fragile Nebraska Sandhills. A
map of the project borrowed from the US Department of State website1
appears below. The Ogallala Aquifer is depicted below, too.

US State Dept Map1

1
http://keystonepipeline-xl.state.gov/clientsite/keystonexl.nsf/map.jpg?OpenFileResource

The Ogallala Aquifer2

3. Legal questions have arisen concerning Nebraska's role and authority
as a State government. This green paper analyzes legal concerns in
three areas:

3.1 Where oil pipelines are concerned, what can Nebraska regulate? 3.2
Does Nebraska have authority to regulate its land use by limiting
pipeline routes? 3.3 If Nebraska has the authority to act, how and
when must it do so?

4. After careful study, we conclude Nebraska can regulate its own
land use.

Federal safety regulations preempt *how* the pipeline must be built,
but Nebraska has the right to control, reasonably and responsibly,
*where* it must be built. Pipeline *safety* is federally preempted
but oil pipeline *siting* is not.

5. Nebraska's authority must be exercised by its Legislature. The
Legislature should act before commencement of State Department
authorization for a Canadian border crossing, or construction as
eminent domain proceedings which will likely follow in Nebraska.

6. Unlike the federal government's control of pipeline safety, the
United States lacks authority to regulate, prescribe, or proscribe
sites or routes for proposed pipelines, even

2 Source: http://web.mit.edu/

if they are interstate lines. This deficit concerning oil pipelines
contrasts with national authority over natural gas pipelines. Federal
control over such pipelines is found in the *Natural Gas Act*, 15
*USC* §§ 717 *et seq*. While certificates of public convenience
and necessity are required to operate gas pipelines, no similar
requirement mandates oil pipeline owners or operators must obtain
certification from the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC)
or any other federal agency.

7. The federal government has not preempted the States enacting
pipeline siting issues within a State. Where the federal government
has not acted, the States may. Federal law preempts pipeline safety
issues so Nebraska has no significant role in pipeline design or
construction criteria which is wholly separate from route siting.

8. Though Nebraska has the power to regulate locations at which
pipelines will be placed, it has not exercised this power. Nebraska
is without a statute designing how a proposed route submitted for
approval is to be handled. Simply, Nebraska has no statute pertaining
to any permitting requirements that apply specifically to construction
or operation of oil pipelines.

9. Nebraska has the legal power to regulate its land use and thereby
control the routes for oil pipelines across the State. TransCanada
has one oil pipeline across Nebraska; its location was acquired
without controversy about three years ago. This pipeline lies in an
easement large enough to accommodate TransCanada's second pipeline
across the State. The Legislature can require TransCanada to use
its existing corridor again in eastern Nebraska by enacting a law
generally requiring pipeline companies to consolidate their pipelines
in reasonable corridors to maximize land utilization and minimize
interference with land use by others.

10. But, to exercise this power, the Legislature must enact a
statute and the Governor must approve it. This should occur and be
accomplished by the end of 2011. Presently, Nebraska has no pipeline
siting statute. It does have an eminent domain statute that permits
pipelines to exercise the power of eminent domain. *Neb Rev Stat*
§ 57-1101. If Nebraska's Legislature enacts a thoughtful statute
governing pipeline siting, it is likely the statute will be valid
and enforceable against TransCanada and all other oil pipeline
companies. At ¶¶ 86 *et seq*. possible courses of action are
collected and listed. The list is not exhaustive.

11. Nebraska's siting authority may be more theoretical than real if
it delays action. Once the United States State Department issues a
permit authorizing construction of the pipeline and the route across
Montana and South Dakota is finalized, it will be difficult to compel
TransCanada to move its proposed pipeline eastward to its existing
corridor. October 26, 2011 David A Domina
