## Pipeline Construction in Sandhills Native Rangelands

TransCanada is committed to restoring the productive capability
of all lands disturbed by pipeline construction. We implement a
comprehensive program from project planning, through construction,
to reclamation and monitoring, in order to ensure that disturbances
are reduced as much as possible, and to restore lands crossed by our
projects to their pre-construction productivity.

Native rangelands are important ecosystems that support a variety
of uses such as livestock grazing, wildlife habitat and recreational
opportunities. With over 50 years of experience building and operating
pipelines, TransCanada has successfully reclaimed thousands of
acres of native rangeland on pipeline rights-of-way throughout North
America. Included in these efforts are successful pipeline reclamation
projects in the arid native prairie regions of southern Alberta and
southwestern Saskatchewan, including areas such as the Great Sand
Hills of Saskatchewan.

Although we are experienced at native rangeland reclamation, we
recognize that native rangelands within the Sandhills region of
southern South Dakota and central Nebraska creates unique challenges.

The Sandhills are an extensive and biologically significant ecoregion
encompassing approximately 23,000 square miles in South Dakota and
Nebraska. Soils are typically sandy and fragile, forming blowouts and
bare dunes where vegetation is not properly managed. The Sandhills
are not a uniform landscape, but a collection of diverse habitats
that vary from exposed wind-swept ridges and blow outs, to areas of
soil deposition on the windward side of hills, with wet meadows and
alkali lakes in valley bottoms.

To help us better understand this special environment, during project
scoping, TransCanada engaged in discussions with several regional
experts on Sandhills ecology and restoration at universities and
government agencies, including experts at the University of Nebraska,
the University of South Dakota, the Natural Resources Conservation
Service (NRCS) and state road departments.

Best Management Practices

The following best management practices will be applied to the Keystone
XL Project.

Right-of-Way Siting

* Incorporate minor route re-alignments through the Sandhills region.

* Attempt to locate the right-of-way in areas of higher soil moisture
and greater soil structure while avoiding wetlands to the maximum
extent possible.

Right-of-Way Construction

A Typical construction right-of-way for a 36 inch diameter pipeline
is 110-feet wide, with a 50-foot permanent easement and a 60-foot
temporary construction easement. Steep slopes can sometimes require
additional incremental workspace during construction.

* Train construction crews to apply an Access Control Plan in the
Sandhills to minimize impacts to this sensitive ecosystem. TransCanada
will ensure that the plan considers: timing of construction, the
reduction of traffic volumes, restriction of equipment and vehicle
types, and alternative mitigation measures to address site-specific
issues.

* Minimize disturbance of the fragile soils and native vegetation,
to the extent practicable.

* Conduct topsoil salvage in all areas where grading and excavation
occurs. Topsoil shall be conserved and stored separately from subsoil,
typically in long windrows adjacent to the trench.
    Protect topsoil piles from erosion through the use of best
    management practices such as applying water, matting, mulch
    or tackifier.

Once the pipe has been laid, subsoil will be returned to the trench,
and topsoil re-spread to the original contour of the land for
reclamation.

Right-of-Way Reclamation

* Revegetate the right-of-way in areas of native rangeland by
using seed mixes adapted to the Sandhills. Developed with input
from the local NRCS offices and through collaboration with regional
experts. Adjust seed application rates accordingly to complement the
application methods, seed bed and terrain constraints.

* Ensure all seed is certified noxious weed free and calculated on
a pure live seed (PLS) basis.

* Use straw, native prairie hay or other approved materials as mulch,
and apply to the right-of-way and crimped into the soil to prevent wind
erosion. Ensure all mulch is documented as noxious weed free. Annual
cover-crops may also be used to provide a vegetative cover to control
erosion where appropriate.

* Use of hodder gaugers or imprinters to create impressions in the
soil, reducing erosion, improving moisture retention and creating
microsites for seed germination where appropriate.

* Use sediment logs (straw wattles), slope breakers or silt forcing
where appropriate to manage soil erosion issues in place.

* Apply photodegradable matting on steep slopes or areas prone to
extreme wind exposure such as north- or west-facing slopes and ridge
tops. Use biodegradable pins in place of metal staples to hold the
matting in place.

* Take into consideration soil, vegetative and regional moisture
constraints, and the landowner’s livestock grazing management
to evaluate the need to implement fencing of the right-of-way
from livestock to hasten vegetation re-establishment. Incorporate
management concerns such as livestock access to water or movement
within a pasture into any decisions. Compensate landowners for any
grazing restrictions experienced due to fencing.

Post Construction

* TransCanada is committed to postconstruction monitoring and
repair. Revegetation with native species typically requires
several growing seasons to become fully established. We will monitor
reclamation on the right-of-way for several years and repair areas of
failure. During monitoring, we will make sure landowners are informed
of our efforts and intentions.

* Noxious weeds are a concern for landowners and TransCanada. We have
developed noxious weed management plans specific to each state crossed
by our project. These plans have been developed in consultation with
state and county experts. We are committed to preventing the spread of
noxious weeds via the righ-tof-way. In areas such as the Sandhills,
we may implement alternative or less invasive control measures to
reduce effects to the sensitive ecosystem.

* TransCanada will work with landowners to prevent unauthorized use
of the right-ofway by ensuring that fences are adequately replaced
and any new access roads established for construction are removed
and reclaimed.