Transcript Prepared By the Clerk of the Legislature Transcriber's Office
Floor Debate May 19, 2011
(...)
CLERK: Mr. President, returning to General File. Senator Sullivan would offer LB629. (Read title.) Introduced on January 19 of this year, at that time referred to the Natural Resources Committee for public hearing. The bill was advanced to General File. There are committee amendments, Mr. President. (AM1465, Legislative Journal page 1610.)
SENATOR CARLSON: Thank you, Mr. Clerk. Senator Sullivan, you're recognized to open on LB629.
SENATOR SULLIVAN: Thank you, Mr. President. And good morning, colleagues. And I must say, I'm glad to be saying good morning instead of good evening. (Laughter) And first and foremost, I want to thank the members of the Natural Resources Committee, thank them for bearing with my persistence for quite a few weeks--several months, in fact--for offering suggestions on amending the bill, because as you will see, it has been significantly amended, and of course, most of all, for voting the bill out of committee 8-0. I have literally worked on this legislation all session. And in the process, there have been lessons learned. I've learned that nothing is ever as easy as it seems. And just because there's been a detailed interim study conducted by Senator Dubas and myself, it doesn't mean all our questions have been answered. And not everyone is going to agree with me, surprisingly enough, and particularly for some of those outside the glass they will say this bill just doesn't satisfy me and it doesn't do enough. But here we have what I affectionately call my pipeline bill. And it is in a very amended form from when I first began, but that's a good thing. Why? Because even though in this state we have miles and miles, over 20,000 miles actually, of pipeline that currently exist, we have virtually no legislation on the books relative to pipelines. This is a start and I will remind you of that several times. It is a beginning of...and you will see me stand up here in future sessions, hopefully, talking more about this subject. And I will say, too, that I would venture to guess that many of you have received phone calls, e-mails, personal conversations with many citizens across this state who are concerned with the current situation of an oil pipeline traversing our state, and that has caused some concern. It's also given the topic a lot of media attention. And in the process of all of that, I think there's been a lot of confusion. Confusion over what the state can do, what is federal oversight versus state oversight. And actually, the focus has been on that present situation of an oil pipeline company that's coming in to our state as we speak. My bill focuses not only on the here and now but going forward, because this is not only the start of legislation, but there will be much more pipeline activity in this state and we have to be on top of it. I think before I get into some of the details, too, it's also important for you to know and be clear about what I'm not attempting to do. I'm not trying to stop this pipeline. This legislation does not deal with siting nor does it suggest a change in the route of the proposed pipeline that I refer to, nor am I interested in seeing this legislation amended beyond what is currently the committee amendment that Senator Langemeier will be speaking about shortly. And I know he will go into details about it, but I want to tell you very briefly what the Pipeline Reclamation Act includes. It defines reclamation as restoration of an area through which a pipeline is constructed, reclamation that returns the land as close as reasonably practicable to the condition, contour, and vegetation that existed prior to construction. It says that reclamation costs include but are not limited to the cost of that restoration of real and personal property, of the restoration of our natural resources, rehabilitation of habitat or wildlife, and the cost of revegetation. It also says that the pipeline carrier is responsible for reclamation during the construction, the operation, and maintenance of the pipeline, in essence, for the life of the pipeline, until it's decommissioned or removed. And it sets minimum standards, but those minimum standards will not supersede a negotiated contract between an oil pipeline company and a landowner. It also allows state agencies, counties, cities and villages to pursue reclamation costs for maintenance and repair of roads, bridges, infrastructure that's been related to the pipeline construction, maintenance, and operation of the pipeline. And it includes the emergency clause. I will say, when we say reclamation in the broad sense, you have to also keep in mind as this pipeline, the current one or others for that matter, travel across Nebraska, the geography will change, the topography will change and reclamation efforts will change. And it will also be determined by the individual contract that is agreed upon between the landowner and the pipeline company. And I wanted to be careful that my efforts in this bill didn't supersede those that might in fact be harsher and more detailed standards than what are required of the minimum standards in this act. As I said, this is a beginning. And quite frankly, in spite of the fact that we have so many pipelines, pipeline legislation is a new frontier for Nebraska. And pipelines can be a good thing not only for our economy of this state but also countrywide. But they have to be a good thing and we have to manage them correctly. And as a state and as state senators we have a responsibility. We were sent down here to help protect our citizens, to protect the natural assets of our state, and that's what I'm trying to do. Granted, this legislation is broad. It still requires that a landowner has to take a company to court if they're unhappy with the reclamation. But you know what? It's not going to be needed if a pipeline company is a good neighbor and uses best management practices, as they say they will do. So as I said in closing, I was sent down here to work for the citizens of this state and that's why I've been so persistent with this pipeline bill. It means a lot to me, as do the citizens of this state and as do the natural resources. I'm very concerned about doing my part to protect them. And I think in a small way, and in some ways potentially very big ways, LB629 does that. Thank you very much.
SENATOR CARLSON: Thank you, Senator Sullivan. As the Clerk stated, there are amendments from the Natural Resources Committee. Senator Langemeier, as Chair of the committee, you're recognized to open on AM1465.
SENATOR LANGEMEIER: Mr. President, members of the body, first of all, I'd like to thank Senator Sullivan and the committee. We've been talking about this issue pretty much in-depth this entire session, up until now. And it's been a really good conversation, and they did an interim study and we learned a lot. We have mountains of information within our office on this issue. Senator Sullivan did a pretty good job of doing the introduction on the committee amendment, and I'm going to go through it again just to put it in some different words, I guess. The amendment creates the Oil Pipeline Reclamation Act. It requires that a pipeline carrier owning, constructing, operating and maintaining a pipeline throughout the state for transmission of oil be financially responsible for reclamation costs related to construction, operation and management of the pipeline. So they put the line through, they're going to put the ground back afterwards, they have a problem, they're going to replace or repair when they're done. This act does not prohibit governmental entities from pursuing reclamation costs related to road damage, bridges or other infrastructure that might be damaged in the process of putting a pipeline through. The act does not affect any agreements made between landowners and pipeline carriers and it is not to affect the pipeline carriers' duties under the federal laws or any permits granted thereof. The rest of the introduction Senator Sullivan did a good job on. What I want to go to now, and you got a letter passed out, is to talk about the hierarchy over who monitors pipelines. The hierarchy starts with the Department of State with a Presidential Permit. At that level, we have the National Environmental Protection Act, we have the environmental impact statement that comes from them and that's where the pipeline company applies to. We have the National Historic Preservation Act. Those all fall under the Secretary of State. And then under that we have the Department of Transportation and the Office of Pipeline Safety. And under that, you've heard me say many times, PHMSA, which is the Pipeline Hazardous Materials Safety Administration. Under that they have the Pipeline Safety Act, 49 CFR 194 and 195, and 49 U.S.C. 601. They have it to create an emergency response plan through the Department of Transportation and PHMSA, and with that they have 57 special conditions that apply to pipelines. Then under that you have the Federal Regulatory Commission and they deal with all tariff charges in the U.S. for pipelines that go through the Environmental Protection Agency. Under that you have their Emergency Management Plan, and under that you have the National Oil Hazardous Substance Pollution Compact Plan. And further under that you have the Clean Water Act and Oil Pollution Act of 1990 that they have to do. Now you have all those. Where does the state come in? The state comes in with the Nebraska Department of Environmental Quality. They have some real responsibilities under all those federal laws that we, as a state, designate them to look at and enforce. You'll see we passed out a letter that we inquired, for this debate, to the Department of Environmental Quality. And it has just a number of questions that we wanted to have out there to what is DEQ's response going to be if there's a leak? What is their responsibility for a number of things? And we passed that out to you to review as you go through. And so I'd ask you to read through that. It's a great piece of information from the questions to the answers and it's in great detail how that all starts and what's the process if there is a leak within the state of Nebraska. So for now, I'm going to stop with the introduction of AM1465 and I'm more than happy to answer questions. Thank you.
SENATOR CARLSON: Thank you, Senator Langemeier. Members, you've heard the opening on LB629 and the underlying amendment, AM1465. The floor is now open for debate. Senators wishing to speak are Fulton, Dubas, Coash, Larson, Lathrop, and others. Senator Fulton, you're recognized.
SENATOR FULTON: Thank you, Mr. President, members of the body. I would like to yield my time to Senator Dubas.
SENATOR CARLSON: Senator Dubas, 4 minutes 50 seconds.
SENATOR DUBAS: Thank you very much, Mr. President. Thank you very much, Senator Fulton, for that professional courtesy. He came over and told me he was first in the queue. I said that's fine. He said, well, you've worked on this a long time so I would yield you my time if you'll give me yours. So I do appreciate that acknowledgement because this has been a project that Senator Sullivan and I and our staff have invested a great deal of time in. So I would like to acknowledge our staff also and the staff of the Natural Resources Committee for all the work they did. As I stated, this has been a long time coming. It started way last year when Senator Sullivan and I introduced an interim study resolution that we cochaired. And the objective of that interim study was to try to gather objective information about not just the pipeline that is currently proposed to go through the state, but pipelines in general. There was a lot of information being floated. We were hearing from constituents on both sides of this issue. And it was...trying to sift through all that information to find out wherein does the truth really lie, and so we conducted that interim study resolution where we met with all of our state agency directors, we met with experts in the Sandhills and in water and those issues from the university. We met with the federal delegation and federal officials. We really tried to be very broad in our approach to that interim study resolution. And we do have a report that is on the Legislature's Web site under the Natural Resources Committee link. So if you would like to look through that report, there is a great deal of very good and timely information on there. And one of the questions we were looking to answer was, does the state of Nebraska have any authority to interact with projects such as this or even should we have any authority? And I think it came out, in my mind anyway, is that we do. And so it's just making that decision as to what we want that authority to look like. I introduced a bill along with Senator Sullivan's bill and Senator Haar introduced a bill. I thought from the git-go, when this first all started, it seemed like the Public Service Commission was the logical place to go to have some type of oversight or interaction with pipelines such as this because they deal with a lot of pipelines. They deal with intrastate pipelines, natural gas pipelines, they have interaction with FERC. And I have passed out a chart that shows you the types of requirements that natural gas pipelines have to comply with through FERC, and it's very detailed. There are a lot of protections and checks in place for natural gas pipelines. That's why this, Senator Sullivan's bill as well as the bill I introduced, did not deal with natural gas pipelines, because FERC does put a great deal of requirements in place as far as governance and permitting and oversight and protections after the pipeline is in place. My question was...and I really did feel that if these types of oil pipelines had to comply with what our natural gas pipelines have to deal with, we probably wouldn't be having this discussion or not this detailed of a discussion. Through our interim study we looked at, well, what do other states have in place? How are they dealing with these types of pipelines? And every state, as you would guess, deal with things in different ways. And again, part of my bill that I put together kind of cherry-picked what I thought were the appropriate things out of various states' laws that would serve us well in Nebraska. My bill created a permitting process through the Public Service Commission and also dealt with eminent domain. And that's an issue we're hearing from our constituents a lot about too. And under my bill, you would be able to...
SENATOR CARLSON: One minute.
SENATOR DUBAS: ...you wouldn't be able to use eminent domain unless you had received a permit from the Public Service Commission. I'll continue to work on my bill. Hopefully, have something that I can get agreement with the committee on and come out with next year. There are a lot of gray areas in what we're dealing with through this. This isn't just a national project, this is an international project. So you have the Department of State and a lot of other federal agencies that are involved in this. And so it did create that grayness as to really how much can the state get involved. There are a lot of different types of permits: there's construction, there's siting, there's maintenance, there's operation, there's an emergency response, abandonment, just a whole long list of the types of permits that they have to go through in order to be able to move forward with construction. So again, looking at what other states have done, trying to decide...
SENATOR CARLSON: Time.
SENATOR DUBAS: Thank you, Mr. President.
SENATOR CARLSON: Senator Dubas, you're recognized. This is your time.
SENATOR DUBAS: I would yield my time to Senator Fulton.
SENATOR CARLSON: Senator Fulton, 4 minutes 50 seconds.
SENATOR FULTON: Thank you, Mr. President, members of the body. Thank you, Senator Dubas. When I first came here, whenever it was, 2007, there were a couple of senators who I met with, one of whom was Senator Loran Schmit. And he shared with me this story about the power that state senators have. And many of you know Senator Schmit. He was trying to mentor a young senator. Well, maybe two, three days after that, I was speaking with Senator Chambers. Now we didn't always fight. What he said to me, he said, and you can just about hear him, the way he said, he said, kid, you have no idea, you have no idea how much power people have given you as a state senator. And I remember that. Those two fellows were trying to provide some frame of reference. Senators, we have enormous power. We have been given a great deal of power by the people. The word sovereign, you heard me talk about it when I brought this Tenth Amendment resolution last year or whenever it was, two years ago or last year. I looked it up. One possessing or held to possess supreme political power; one that exercises supreme authority within a limited sphere; and the synonyms that were listed for the word sovereign: autocrat, potentate, ruler, monarch. In the fourteenth century the word first came to be and it was a reference to kings. Today, the sovereign in our country is the people. That supreme power that existed for kings and monarchs exists in the people today, the people situated within a state, that's us, Nebraska. The people of Nebraska are the sovereign. And I have to tell you, it is troubling when a company from another country can come in and dictate to the people of a sovereign state what's going to happen on their own private property. And if we as senators believe that we don't have the authority to stand against such power, I ask you to consider, who holds the authority to govern in this state? It is the people and they express themselves through us. I say all of this to put us in a frame of reference. I'm proud of the Natural Resources Committee for putting this out. And to Senator Sullivan and Senator Dubas, bravo. The people who want to have voice do not have voice unless it comes through their elected officials. The sovereignty of Nebraska is exercised through us. It should be communicated clearly that the landowners who might be threatened with eminent domain have means of recourse. This is a serious business. I have friends who own land who received a letter, and I'll call it that letter, and it is disgusting to think of that a company who I respect, I worked in this industry in oil and gas, that's why I took an interest in this issue last year, this is a respected company, TransCanada. Let's not beat around the bush, that's what we're talking about here. But their interests are different than the interests of landowners, perhaps even in the interest of Nebraska. And when a company from another country has the ability...
SENATOR CARLSON: One minute.
SENATOR FULTON: ...to come in and intimidate and cajole and take that which is not theirs, we have an obligation to say something. Now what it is that we say, that's up to us. But I am proud of the Natural Resources Committee for putting this thing forward. And we should give voice to those who do not have voice otherwise, it's part of our job, it's part of that power that some years ago some veteran senator said to a young senator: you don't have...you have no idea, the power of a state senator. The Secretary of State of our country is going to make a decision as to whether this is in the national interest such that this pipeline will go through the path that's proposed. The Secretary of State speaks on behalf of our country. We speak on behalf of Nebraska and we have some skin in this game. We are a sovereign state and we should not be pushed around by the Secretary of State or a company from another country or any company, for that matter. So I'm hopeful that that at least...
SENATOR CARLSON: Time.
SENATOR FULTON: Thank you, Mr. President.
SENATOR CARLSON: Thank you, Senator Fulton and Senator Dubas. (Visitors introduced.) Senator Coash, you're recognized.
SENATOR COASH: Thank you, Mr. President. Good morning, colleagues. Following Senator Fulton's speech, that's a tough one to follow. But I want to talk a little bit about the amendment that becomes the bill and about reclamation and why this is important. Kind of like Senator Lautenbaugh reminds people that he's a former election commissioner, I like to remind people that I grew up in the Sandhills, spent my life there before I moved to Lincoln. And reclamation, which is what this amendment does, is kind of a different animal when you talk about the Sandhills. Where I grew up, 100 yards from my backdoor there is an old...we called it the pioneer dump. It was a place where the Sooners and people in covered wagons that had come through, they stopped and they unloaded a bunch of garbage. And they dug a hole so some of it wouldn't blow away. Now you might ask, how do I know that that's there? Let me tell you how I know. The hole is still there. There is no vegetation over the place where those pioneers dug into the ground to put some of their waste. And as a kid, we'd go out there and we'd dig through it to try to find things that they had thrown away. We found metal milk jugs, we found toys, we found broken dishes that were over 100 years old. And every couple of years or so I go back and I can find more things because the hole has gotten bigger and it's exposed more litter that is over 100 years old. Reclamation is important to address and I'm glad that that's being addressed in this bill. According to a report by our own professors here, revegetation following a disturbance in the Sandhills is much more difficult than normally encountered by projects like this, but it is doable with adequate planning, with adequate resources and by putting forth the effort. And because of these specific concerns surrounding the fragile nature of the Sandhills, it is important that we as a Legislature set our minimum expectations: that reclamation occur following construction of any pipeline going through our state. AM1465 and the underlying bill is a small step and it's the right direction. But I hope we as a body do not wipe our hands and say, this is all we need to do to make sure that we protect our resources. This is what we're going to do this year. But we're not going to take our eyes off the ball, we're going to pay attention to what's happening. And if we need to do something else, we'll do it, it's our responsibility to do it. Right now, we've got reclamation as part of what's been advanced from the committee. I support it and I urge my colleagues to support it. We need to keep it as it is. But we cannot take our eyes off the ball. It is too vital to our resource of water. It's vital to our resource in the Sandhills. But we must keep our eyes on it. And I do trust our Natural Resources Committee and I trust Senator Sullivan and I trust my colleagues that we will not take our eyes off of this issue. And I would yield the remainder of my time to Senator Sullivan.
SENATOR CARLSON: Senator Sullivan, 1 minute.
SENATOR SULLIVAN: Thank you, Mr. President, and thank you, Senator Coash. And I do stand committed to continuing to work on this and I will. There have been a couple of questions that have come forward, one with respect to the fiscal note. The way the bill has currently been amended by the committee, there is no fiscal note. So we don't have to worry about that. Senator Dubas also mentioned that the three...the interim study that we talked about, there were three things, basically, that came out of that that perhaps the state should look at carefully: one being liability, one being reclamation, and one being siting. You literally have to pick apart all three of those and look at them separately and so I chose to look at reclamation. I think it's very difficult to try to lump them all together into one piece of legislation and also very difficult to find out, as Senator Dubas alluded to, what we can and can't do. And if you've got any particular...
SENATOR CARLSON: Time.
SENATOR SULLIVAN: Thank you.
SENATOR CARLSON: Thank you, Senator Sullivan and Senator Coash. Again, senators wishing to speak are Larson, Lathrop, Adams, Louden, Hansen, Gloor, and others. Senator Larson, you're recognized.
SENATOR LARSON: Thank you, Mr. President, members of the body. I have a direct interest in this issue as well. Part of the first pipeline goes through the eastern half of my district. And later today we'll be debating redistricting bills and if the committee's proposed bill passes, it will go through the new western half of my district, though we're yet to decide those. And I'm sure that will be fun later. As I said, I rise in support of the amendment to LB629 because it does address a main concern of my constituents and my future constituents possibly. In my district there has been positive feedback. From the first pipeline construction, constituents in Cedar County have talked about the increased economic activity and the responsible practices of TransCanada. There has not been any incidents or spills or leaks, nor have there been any problems relating to the restoration of the ground disturbed during construction. I've had a few constituents talk to me but they said TransCanada has been very, very helpful if they've had problems and working with the citizens. So that's...that eases my mind. However, the landscape through the Sandhills is different than that in Cedar County. Constituents in Holt County, which is included in the proposed route of the new pipeline, have expressed concerns that the land will not be adequately restored to its current state. The fragility of the Sandhills is a serious concern. And this amendment clearly sets out the guidelines for TransCanada or any other business who wishes to construct a pipeline carrying these liquids. Furthermore, while there has been some recent news of land not being appropriately restored along the pipeline in Montana, TransCanada has pledged to address the problem because of regulations in Montana. This kind of regulation will ensure that an oil company will be responsible and will have to fix any ongoing or future land restoration issues. TransCanada has been working with experts on the ecology of the Sandhills, and I'm confident that they will address the concerns of my constituents within the guidelines of this amendment. The pipeline has created a positive impact thus far in Nebraska and this additional route can result in similar positive impacts. The committee amendment is the right step to ensuring that. Again, I support AM1465 and LB629. And if Senator Sullivan would like the remainder of my time, I'd happily yield it to her.
SENATOR CARLSON: Thank you, Senator Larson. Senator Sullivan, 2 minutes 15 seconds. Senator Sullivan waives. Senator Lathrop, you're recognized.
SENATOR LATHROP: Thank you, Mr. President. Colleagues, good morning once again. I'd like to ask Senator Sullivan some questions if I might.
SENATOR CARLSON: Senator Sullivan, would you yield?
SENATOR SULLIVAN: Certainly.
SENATOR LATHROP: Thank you. Senator, as I look through the bill and the amendments, I have a question for you. We talk about reclamation, and when you build the pipeline reclamation would mean covering it up, planting some seed, making it look like the topography looked before. Is that the case?
SENATOR SULLIVAN: Yes and no. Would you like me to expound on that a little bit?
SENATOR LATHROP: Yes, without burning up my whole five minutes.
SENATOR SULLIVAN: Okay. The bill says, yes, that as reasonably practicable to return the land to its original contour, vegetation, all of that. However, it also says we're not going to supersede the negotiations and the agreement that has taken place between the company and a landowner. So that could include some additional features. For example, in the Sandhills when they open up that ground, cover it back up once the pipeline is in, they're going to have some issues, as Senator Coash said, with restoring that vegetation. So it could very well involve fencing so we don't have cattle going across that area. So there are going to be variations in how the reclamation is taking place.
SENATOR LATHROP: What if there's a leak? What does your bill do in the event there is a...this pipeline sprouts a leak, as they do from time to time?
SENATOR SULLIVAN: Well, Senator Langemeier mentioned earlier there are federal...in the federal permitting process, part of the responsibility for oversight in the event of a leak is given to the Department of Environmental Quality, not only to respond when a leak is identified, but then to oversee the recovery and reclamation. So my bill deals just with reclamation. But that's not to say that the pipeline company will not have responsibility to do some of the recovery, they will under the federal permitting process overseen by DEQ. However, in addition, since my bill deals with reclamation, if you think about it, okay, there is a leak, it comes out onto the land. The Reclamation Act as it now is proposed covers the life of the pipeline. And so if there is oil on the land that is in the area of the pipeline, that will have to be reclaimed. And that's covered under this bill.
SENATOR LATHROP: Okay. So between the federal statute and your bill we provide for returning the land to its original state after the pipe has gone in. We can preserve the pipe or the area around it if we need to with a fence; if there's a leak, the pipeline company will be responsible for cleanup and restoring the land. And then when the useful life of the pipe is exhausted or there is no longer enough oil up in Canada to transport it through this pipe are they responsible for taking the pipe out of the ground and restoring the Sandhills back to their original state?
SENATOR SULLIVAN: The act says, for the useful life of the pipeline and until it's decommissioned. And that decommissioning can be achieved in a couple of different ways. In some cases, as I understand it, the pipeline may just remain in the ground. And then there is some sort of different liquid that is put through the pipeline. However, in some cases the pipeline would be removed and in that process of decommissioning, yes, they disturbed the land and they have to reclaim it.
SENATOR LATHROP: If they're not going to run water, molasses, whatever they're going to run through the pipeline, after they're done running oil through it do we make them take the pipe out of there or can it...
SENATOR CARLSON: One minute.
SENATOR LATHROP: ...may it sit there in the Sandhills until it rots?
SENATOR SULLIVAN: As I said, that very well may be the case. It's not covered in this legislation. Will it rot? I don't know, I'm not an engineer. And as I said, the decommissioning can be handled in a number of different ways. And I would suspect that could possibly be one of the areas that we look at in future legislation is abandonment or decommissioning of pipelines.
SENATOR LATHROP: Do you think we can regulate...I mean, right now, we're at the beginning of the process and they haven't put the pipe in the ground. Isn't that the time to set up what we should do at the end of the useful life of the pipe rather than legislate it in the middle of the life of the pipe?
SENATOR SULLIVAN: In a perfect world, yes. And as I said, I did what I could as far as getting something out here on the floor.
SENATOR CARLSON: Time. Thank you, Senator Lathrop and Senator Sullivan. Senator Adams, you're recognized.
SENATOR ADAMS: Thank you, Mr. President and members. I've been in this body five years now and all five years I have had to deal with TransCanada. And I don't say that in a negative way. One pipeline has already been completed and runs through my district and now we're on to number two. And the reason I point that out to you is because I want to explain to you what I see my relationship to having been with them and some of the obstacles that my staff and I have had to deal with, not obstacles necessarily imposed by TransCanada, by federal law, by federal law. My staff and I have met multiple times over the course of five years with TransCanada. They've answered all of my questions. Did I always get the answer that I wanted or a constituent wanted? Not necessarily, but they've answered them all. They've answered questions about safety. They've answered questions about liability. They've answered questions about reclamation. Again I say, did I always get the answer that I wanted? Not necessarily. We've probably lost track of how many constituent e-mails and phone calls we've had in my office over this issue the first time the pipeline came through and now the second. And they're all very legitimate concerns that constituents have: concerns about the aquifer, concerns about the Sandhills, even though they're not in my district, but concerns nonetheless, concerns about leaks, concerns about if there is a leak who is going to clean it up. Who sited this pipeline? Who said it ought to run through a well field of a second-class city? What power do we have in this state? Where's DEQ? Does the Public Service Commission have a role in all of this? What about natural resources? What can we do? And I don't want to sound like I've resigned the legislative powers here, but quite honestly, from my perspective after five years, there isn't a whole lot that we can do on interstate pipelines. Once the Department of State has said, here it goes, there isn't a lot. And two years ago, I thought, well, I'm going to bring forth legislation. And we listed tons of things and went through every one of them in my office, thinking can we do this, or is it preempted by federal law, or are we just throwing gravel in the machinery? And if that be the case, what are we doing it for? If we're not really going to gain something from legislation that we pass here regarding these pipelines, I don't want to do it just so we can say, well, the pipeline came in, but we sure did make it tough on them. I don't want to do that. I think this bill has merit, it's something. And from my understanding of what we can do, this is something that we can do. And the siting business, I think back to my days as a mayor. And whenever you put a water line in or a street line in or high line in, or whatever, it's always: why in my yard? And...
SENATOR CARLSON: One minute.
SENATOR ADAMS: ...couldn't we take and move that pipeline over just a little bit? I have seed corn producers in my district. Seed corn production in my district is probably as big as the airline industry is to Wichita. And TransCanada is struggling with how to deal with that but they're confronting it. All said and done, I'm about out of time. You know what my biggest concern is? Maybe it ought to be water, maybe it ought to be reclamation, maybe it ought to be my seed corn producers. My biggest concern is eminent domain. You can't get it done without it, it's not been permitted yet. With the number of constituents that I have that feel as though, right or wrong, that they have in effect been pushed to the edge and said, sign the easement agreement or we're going to court, all right, that is how eminent domain works. But you haven't been permitted yet. I struggle with that.
SENATOR CARLSON: Time.
SENATOR ADAMS: Thank you, Mr. President.
SENATOR CARLSON: Thank you, Senator Adams. Senator Louden, you're recognized.
SENATOR LOUDEN: Thank you, Mr. President and members of the body. As I look at this bill and then as Senator Adams talks about the issues that he's worked with, I guess the first thing I think of is a quote from Winston Churchill when the British won the battle at El Alamein and he said, this isn't the end and this isn't the beginning but it is the end of the beginning. And this is where I think we are with this bill here. This is a bill that we can go forward with because any of you that's ever been around any of the coal mining in Wyoming or Texas or anyplace, they're required now to put that land back exactly like it was before they took the sema coal out. You can do the same thing with the reclamation in these pipelines. And this is where we have to work to make sure that our environment on the top is the same as it was prior to that, that they can't go in there and literally tear that whole countryside up and walk off and leave it. Senator Lathrop asked, are we going to make them dig that pipeline back up? Well, at the present time, nobody has done that. A case in point is look at the abandoned railroads that we have across the state of Nebraska and no one has made them go back in there and level off those grades that they built maybe 100 years ago or so and put the land back like it was. So at the present time, the pipeline will probably stay in the ground as long as it doesn't disturb anybody on top of the ground. So I think this bill has merits. I'll support the bill. But I think we have to go ahead with it and work on it again next year and the following year because we are going to see more mining and more of these things happen in Nebraska, these rare minerals or something that's coming about. There could be huge mining and different kinds of ways of separating rare minerals, all the way from the Sandhills of Nebraska, all the way down here at Elm Creek, wherever it is that they're putting in a mine. We don't have any regulations to cover any of that. A lot of that is covered by the federal people and it's also...at the present time we have a letter here from Linder from the Department of Environmental Quality that covers some of those issues with spills. We worked with that in the Natural Resources Committee years ago when I was down here, all the way from hog lots to leaking storage tanks to everything else. So we do have some regulations to address part of the problems. But I think this is a work in progress, and I think Senator Sullivan has probably done quite well by bringing forth what she has. Another point I would make out is when we talk about TransCanada and somebody mentioned it's another country. I don't know how many of you were around long enough, but years ago in the Sandhills, when that got settled, many of those settlers that were done homesteading in the Sandhills went to Canada. I have a lot of neighbors that have relatives that went on up into Canada and homesteaded. And if you'll read some of the history, the reason the Transcontinental Canadian railroad was...Trans Canada railroad was built was because they had a fear that there was enough Americans going up into Alberta and Saskatchewan that that country, that part of the country would actually try to connect to the United States. Several years ago, when we were doing a lot of well drilling out in western Nebraska for oil and gas, those were Canadian firms that came down from Alberta and were drilling in western Nebraska. Now they were Canadian firms, but they were owned by Texas oilmen at the time because the lease and stuff we got came from the Texas oilmen, but they were Canadian companies down there drilling. So there's quite a...
SENATOR CARLSON: One minute.
SENATOR LOUDEN: ...a relationship between the central United States and Canada. And that's the reason we're even working for this Heartland Expressway. We used to get catalogues all the time from Regina, Saskatchewan for farm machinery. And any of you that have bought farm machinery, take a look at it sometime and see how much of it is made in Canada, especially the short line stuff. So I support this. I think we need to keep working on it. This is just, as I say, this is just the end of the beginning. We need to begin...we need to work on it continually. And I support the amendment that the Natural Resources Committee has done. Thank you, Mr. President.
SENATOR CARLSON: Thank you, Senator Louden. Senator Hansen, you're recognized.
SENATOR HANSEN: Thank you, Mr. President, members of the Legislature. I, too, stand in support of the amendment. I do have one question for Senator Langemeier, if he would yield.
SENATOR CARLSON: Senator Langemeier, would you yield?
SENATOR LANGEMEIER: I would.
SENATOR HANSEN: Senator Langemeier, in the original bill had an appropriation of $500,000 a year because the Public Service Commission did not have the expertise to do what the bill asked it to do. Can you explain if that still stands or where that went to?
SENATOR LANGEMEIER: You know, the original bill would have required the Public Service Commission to take an active role in the oversight of pipelines. That was new to them, so they created a fiscal note. I'm not sure what they based it on, so you always base it a little higher than natural, I would assume, to be safe. With the amendment, they don't have any responsibility generated because of this bill. And I would assume and I can say with good authority that fiscal note will disappear.
SENATOR HANSEN: Okay, appreciate that. At the same time though, the handout from Senator Dubas, and at the top it says, "Pipeline Regulation Comparison." On the front page, number 20, it says, under operation of these pipelines, that the "service interruption reports to FERC and state Public Service Commission." So what would the state Public Service Commission do with that report?
SENATOR LANGEMEIER: They would have to take that over to DEQ because DEQ is the agency that's going to do any oversight. FERC is going to be the main location you would report to.
SENATOR HANSEN: Okay. (Laugh) Do I dare ask what DEQ would do with it?
SENATOR LANGEMEIER: Should I say nothing? Is that what you mean?
SENATOR HANSEN: No. No. No, what will they do with...I mean the Public Service Commission is still in this loop, but the fiscal note was taken away, $500,000 a year. So their sole purpose in this whole regulatory process is just to convey what FERC tells them to a state agency then? Is that the line of command?
SENATOR LANGEMEIER: Well, first of all, the Public Service Commission won't have anything to do with the pipelines. Let me refer you back to the document you previously mentioned, line 20, operations to FERC and the Public Service Commission, and the X is in the natural gas column. Public Service Commission has extensive natural gas authority. In the pipeline or the crude oil, there's no X, so we are not involving the Public Service Commission in this at all. So if they do get a call because somebody doesn't know who to call, they're going to refer them over to DEQ.
SENATOR HANSEN: Okay. Thank you. That makes a difference. And Senator Dubas came back here and corrected my thought process also that it only deals with natural gas. I am in support of the bill. I'm a "Sandhiller." I've lived there all my life. I don't have the history that Senator Louden reported to us today and that was good, but if you would look at the area of the Sandhills, and it's a big area, there's a lot of variety in that group of Sandhills too. There are places where the aquifer comes to the surface and those are called Sandhills lakes. I would assume that the people I've talked to up in that area, where they're going through some of that Sandhills area, when they come to a lake I can't see any purpose of going through that lake. It looks like when the aquifer is that shallow, at the surface, that they would go around that lake just for ease of installing a pipe. I think that's more than likely why those easements on those ranches up there were so large that they can site that line in when they get there. And I'm sure they have maps, they know where those lakes are. Those lakes do come and go. In dry years they're not there. The reclamation part of it...
SENATOR CARLSON: One minute.
SENATOR HANSEN: Thank you. The reclamation part of this bill is by...or this whole concept is by far the biggest concern because there is no topsoil in the Sandhills, maybe two inches. You can't scrape two inches off and put it back on. It will be mixed with sand. It will look like raw sand, just bare sand when you get done. And the reclamation part of this is huge and if it's not done right and the Keystone pipeline crew that they have in, subcontractors don't do this right, you're going to be able to see that thing from space. It's going to show up like the Great Wall of China. Thank you, Mr. President.
SENATOR CARLSON: Thank you, Senator Hansen and Senator Langemeier. Senator Gloor, you're recognized.
SENATOR GLOOR: Good morning, Mr. President, members, Mr. Chair, Mr. President. I will be supportive of the Natural Resources' amendment and Senator Sullivan's bill, and I appreciate the effort that she and Senator Dubas and others and the Natural Resources Committee has put into this. But with the e-mails and letters and conversations I've had with people about this particular pipeline, I had a flashback to a wandering through a bookstore that I did in Denver five, six years ago, and I ran across a book in an out-of-the-way place that just caught my eye and it was called Black Swan. I began to read it and got caught up in it and walked away from it and came back to it and walked away from it and came back to it. Pretty soon, I think I'd read very quickly about a quarter of this book, which relates to the fact that most major events that happen in our lives and happen in history are unexpected, except when we look at them in hindsight we say, well, they were predictable and we convince ourselves that this unexpected event was in fact predictable. The banking crisis recently fits into that mode of everybody saying hindsight, mea culpas, look what happened here, and yet in fact that sort of crisis was unexpectable. And I had that in the back of my mind as the discussion occurred with the pipeline because it's a man-made mechanism and we worry that something unexpected is going to happen. Black Swan theory would say, yes, it will happen and it will be unexpected, and in hindsight we'll go back and say had we only done this, that or the other thing we might have been able to prevent it. That may not be true. With that and knowing that this bill is about reclamation, I still have a few questions. I wonder if Senator Langemeier would yield to a question.
SENATOR CARLSON: Senator Langemeier, would you yield?
SENATOR LANGEMEIER: Yes.
SENATOR GLOOR: Senator Langemeier, I really do appreciate your walk through the hierarchy and I appreciate the handout sheet as I look through here and I understand that there are different responsibilities folks have. But when there is a problem with the pipeline and we have a problem getting that issue resolved, who ultimately is accountable? I mean can DEQ ultimately go to the Department of State for relief? Is it only the courts that can settle disputes that are out there? You know, in any event, you feel comfortable if you know when push comes to shove somebody, some agency is ultimately accountable. Is there some agency that fits that category?
SENATOR LANGEMEIER: It's going to start with DEQ. DEQ is our local enforcement on the federal level, and then that goes up the chain of command and it goes, you know, the ultimate responsibility on the federal level at the very, very top is going to be the Secretary of State's Office because they've signed on, on this, and so they are the ultimate authority. Now there's lots of little agencies under them that I talked about before that are going to handle components of it, but if you want to say I'm calling it the top, you're going to start with the Secretary of State.
SENATOR GLOOR: And if...so, as an example, a problem might, through a number of different fingers, work its way up, if it spilled into the Platte it might find its way through water, if it spilled on land it might find its way through another entity, but ultimately the Department of State would be in a position to help resolve an issue?
SENATOR LANGEMEIER: Right. Our DEQ is going to work your way up...work you up that chain.
SENATOR GLOOR: So the DEQ really is the beginning of the funnel...
SENATOR CARLSON: One minute.
SENATOR GLOOR: Thank you, Mr. President...where we would start. But through the DEQ, other agencies, specifically federal agencies, could and would be involved so that we're not sitting around wondering who do we go to for redress in this.
SENATOR LANGEMEIER: Correct.
SENATOR GLOOR: Okay. Thank you. Again, I would offer my support for AM1465 and LB629. I don't think there's any way we can ever have reassurances. It's the reason I mentioned the Black Swan event. On the other hand, I know there are a lot of entities who have a concern about this who watch out for us. It's making sure that those entities are, in fact, held to task and come into play that is always a challenge we have in any problems that involve the environment. Thank you, Mr. President.
SENATOR CARLSON: Thank you, Senator Gloor and Senator Langemeier. (Visitors introduced.) Senator Avery, you're recognized.
SENATOR AVERY: Thank you, Mr. President. I have a question for all of us to ponder. It's a rhetorical question. I'm not going to ask anybody to yield to a specific question. Is this the best we can do? Is LB629, with the amendment, the best we can do or is this the most we're willing to do? Let me just list a few of the things that this bill and the amendment do not do. It does not, in my reading of it, does not adequately address liability issues. It does not address siting concerns. And it is clear that states do have a role to play in the siting of pipelines that go across their state. Montana requires, when pipelines are built across Montana, they require that the pipeline builders offer three options to the state and the state gets to pick. We could do that and we could...in the process we could make sure that it does not cross the aquifer. The High Plains aquifer is an important resource to this state. It also does not provide for adequate dispute resolution. I can't find anything in this bill that deals with dispute resolution. Does it adequately deal with the financial responsibility for environmental damage? I don't think it does. What it does do is raise a pretty serious question about a sovereignty issue that Senator Fulton touched on. We have here a foreign corporation that can actually invoke eminent domain, eminent domain action against private property interests of Nebraska citizens. That ought to cause us to pause. Under Nebraska law, eminent domain is to be used to achieve a public objective, a public purpose, not to pave the way for a private foreign entity to achieve private gain. TransCanada's use of public domain, I believe, is way out of line with Nebraska law, and I believe Senator Adams addressed the issue of negotiations with landowners being conducted before the permit has even been issued. And it's my understanding that in many cases TransCanada is threatening landowners: If you don't agree to these terms, we will declare or we will take eminent domain action. This is in my mind a violation of Nebraska's eminent domain law. If we're going to allow the taking of property without the consent of the property owner, then it needs to be done according to Nebraska practices. This bill does not address that and I think that is a very serious problem. Now I'm willing to support the bill not because it's the best we can do, because it appears to be the only thing we're going to do and I think we need to do something. With that, I would be willing to yield time to the introducer of this bill, Senator Sullivan, if she would like to have what remains. Thank you, Mr. President.
SENATOR CARLSON: Thank you, Senator Avery. Senator Sullivan, one minute.
SENATOR SULLIVAN: Thank you very much, Mr. President. And thank you, Senator Avery, and I, based on your comments that you just made, I hope you will join me this next summer as we diligently work on additional legislation that you so eloquently spoke of the fact that we needed. But I will also remind you of one of the things that you've said several times on this floor that we often have to do in this body: We get some things we want and we don't get some things that we want. We have to compromise and that's exactly what I've been trying to do for the last four months. And, no, it's not a perfect bill and, no, we're not doing everything. But I would also tell you that it's not as easy as you make it out to be. So we can say we have siting authority. Well, who are you going to give that siting authority to? And I would venture to guess that if we wanted siting authority over TransCanada, we would have had to have started this process probably in about 2006, long before I got here. It's not...
SENATOR CARLSON: Time. Thank you, Senator Sullivan. Senator Ken Haar, you're recognized.
SENATOR HAAR: Mr. president, members of the body, I rise in strong support of LB629 and AM1465, and I will probably be at the mike two or three times. First of all, watching Senator Sullivan operate through this whole process, I went to my thesaurus and I found these adjectives: tenacity, doggedness, perseverance, persistence. I want to thank her for all of those qualities; also Senator Dubas and her staff and fellow members of the Natural Resources Committee. I've never been on the side of stopping the pipeline. I have some real concerns about where it's being sited. But we have a really dogged...I'm sorry, using that word, we have a really daunting task ahead of us. We're up against an international corporation, and I appreciate Senator Fulton's remarks. And if you'll look carefully at the pipeline regulation comparison that Senator Dubas and her staff worked out, it's really a great piece of work. Again, it is not an exhaustive list, but she talked and I talked to people from natural gas. And the natural gas pipelines, for whatever reason, early on have had much more federal regulation, which in a case of pipelines is a real advantage because they have all the resources. So take a look again at that pipeline regulation comparison. In terms of natural gas, there are preconstruction kinds of federal regulations and there are construction and operation and abandonment, all those things are covered by federal agencies. And you know what? When I talked to the people in Omaha, and I think it's Northern Natural still, they don't have any problem with this. They've been dealing with this for a long time. They accept it and it works very well. Then if you look at the crude oil side of that spreadsheet, this gives you some idea of where our challenge lies. We have a lot of work to do this summer. And so as been said before, the bill is about reclamation, so important, so important. It sets baseline standards across the state and it's a first step and certainly not the last. So again, I want to say I strongly support LB629 and AM1465. How much time do I have left?
SENATOR CARLSON: Two minutes.
SENATOR HAAR: Okay. So knowing that and in no way diminishing the work that Senator Sullivan has done, because, again, I admire her ability to work with other senators, to compromise, to get accomplished what can be done now. And as she said, we need work in the future. Here's my list of things we need to look at. And by the way, I agreed not to bring any amendments forth, there were a lot of compromises in this committee, and I won't. But these are the things we need to look at. First of all, this is not a siting bill. And I, frankly, disagree with Senator Adams when he says there's nothing we can do...well, he didn't say that but he said there's not much we can do, I believe, in terms of some of these things. I want to read to you...
SENATOR CARLSON: One minute.
SENATOR HAAR: Thank you, and I'll continue with this. From the Congressional Research Service, a letter of September 20, 2010, to Lee Terry, and in one of the sections on this is oil pipeline siting authority. Now some people will say, oh gee, it's just a Research Service, but we have many other indications the Research Service is nonpartisan. In Congress, it's highly regarded. And on oil pipeline siting authority it says: In the absence of federal government siting authority, state laws establish the primary siting authority for oil pipelines, including interstate oil pipelines. Now I'm not going to beat us across the back or try to criticize anybody for not being there sooner, but we have this authority if we take it. And if you open the constitution, this great little document, Article X, which says...
SENATOR CARLSON: Time.
SENATOR HAAR: Thank you.
SENATOR CARLSON: Thank you, Senator Haar. Those still wishing to speak include Schumacher, Dubas, Krist, Wallman, and others. Senator Schumacher, you're recognized.
SENATOR SCHUMACHER: Thank you, Mr. President, members of the body. In listening to this discussion and trying to put it all into context, I'm reminded of the biblical story of the little boy trying to spoon the ocean into a hole. This is about energy policy, it's about the titanic financial problems we find ourselves in, and about a Legislature of what Senator Fulton calls a sovereign state trying to deal with its small place in the world. We're dealing with a multinational company, $30 billion market capitalization. Multinational companies can be purchased back and forth on the open exchange, subject to whatever regulatory authority the federal government might have. We deal in a world where we know that the Chinese and the Indians will be adding three-quarter of a billion new vehicles to the world fleet in the next few years. We know that oil and energy are limited in precious quantities that go to the highest bidder. We know that those folks in Beijing have two or three trillion dollars' worth of our money to bid against us on the international market. We know they're going to have more of it. We also know that the energy resources that we would hope would save us, solar and wind, are marginal at best and we're down to nuclear and to hydrocarbons, natural gas, oil, and we probably should do as little as possible to hinder the development of those resources hoping that we will at least be able to retain some of them in the presence of rather overwhelming market power by our financiers in Beijing. That being said, I look at this particular bill and I do have a couple questions for Senator Sullivan of a practical nature. Section...
SENATOR CARLSON: Senator Sullivan, would you yield?
SENATOR SULLIVAN: Yes, I would.
SENATOR SCHUMACHER: Senator Sullivan, on page 2, Section 4, it says the pipeline carrier shall be responsible for the reclamation necessary as a result of constructing as well as operating the pipeline. Then there's a comma and it says "except to the extent another party is determined to be responsible." Let's say that a terrorist organization blows up big chunks of this pipeline.
SENATOR SULLIVAN: Uh-huh.
SENATOR SCHUMACHER: They're clearly the responsible party. Does this absolve the pipeline company from liability?
SENATOR SULLIVAN: As I understand it, it doesn't relieve them of the responsibility for going in and cleaning up the problem but it does...if it's an active...a third party, a terrorist or someone, could be other, maliciously trying to destroy the pipeline, then the pipeline company has to take care of the problem but then they can go back on the other individual for damages or potentially, yes, I mean they aren't responsible financially for it.
SENATOR SCHUMACHER: Well, I can see a case where without this particular language one can say, whoa, you know, we should have expected, as anybody knows operating a pipeline, that somebody who has no money, who's just in a terrorist mood and goes, you know, organizes with a few other cats of similar nature to blow up this line, it should be anticipated. There should be the proper stops, proper guards or whatever in order to stop this thing from happening or address it. And if they don't have that, since this is an anticipated kind of event,...
SENATOR SULLIVAN: Uh-huh.
SENATOR SCHUMACHER: ...they would be responsible for the mess.
SENATOR CARLSON: One minute.
SENATOR SCHUMACHER: But this says except to the extent the other...another party, the guy with no money,...
SENATOR SULLIVAN: Uh-huh.
SENATOR SCHUMACHER: ...is determined to be responsible. I think we might want to address that. And then briefly, in the last part of my time here, it says in Section 6, "The act is not meant to affect the obligations of a pipeline carrier provided for in a negotiated agreement with a landowner." Let's suppose I'm a greedy landlord or landowner and say, look, for an extra million, I don't care what you do on my property. Who...I mean can I, as a landowner, do that?
SENATOR SULLIVAN: I suppose you could. But again, this bill addresses minimum standards irrespective of what might have been the arrangement between the landowner and the pipeline company. So he doesn't care what's done with his ground but there are still minimum standards for revegetation and reclamation.
SENATOR SCHUMACHER: We might want to look at that language and that exception.
SENATOR SULLIVAN: Okay.
SENATOR SCHUMACHER: Thank you, Mr. President.
SENATOR CARLSON: Thank you, Senator Schumacher and Senator Sullivan. (Visitors introduced.) Senator Dubas, you're recognized.
SENATOR DUBAS: Thank you, Mr. President. This bill is a very, very small step but yet a very, very important step to assure our citizens that we, the Legislature, the state of Nebraska, will look out for their best interests. I think Nebraska, in my opinion, will continue to be a prime location for pipelines such as the one that's being proposed right now. Oil lies to our north and the refineries lie to our south, and so it just makes sense that with us being in the center of the nation we will be approached again in the future. And I think again that's why we need to start to take these steps to put appropriate statutory authority in place so that we are prepared for any future such projects. And to date we have nothing in place that gives us any authority to do anything. So again, the importance of this bill is that it opens up that door. It begins to give us that ability to look at permitting and to look at siting and to deal with eminent domain and all of the other things that many other states already have in place. And the proposed pipeline right now complied with those regulations in those other states that are in place, so by that example and observation we do have the ability to put something in place for our state to deal with. Those who don't learn from history are doomed to repeat it, and I think especially in the Sandhills region we learned in the '40s and '50s and '60s what happens when you disturb the Sandhills and how long it has taken to reclaim that Sandhills region and in some places is still being reclaimed, as Senator Coash pointed out with his example. I think that was very important. The interim study really shined a light on the crown jewel of Nebraska and that is the Sandhills region and the Ogallala aquifer that lies underneath it. It is...I asked this question at the interim study to one of the professors who is definitely a leading expert in this environment. It is the most unique ecosystem in the world, not just in the nation, in the world, and I think we should take every precaution in our power to protect this environment and those citizens who really do love that land. Those ranchers out in the Sandhills area know that land better than anybody in the world. They know it. They depend on it for their livelihood. I think what they're telling us should raise to the highest level of listening and interjecting their concerns into this conversation. And again, hopefully we learned a valuable lesson when we tried to farm that area of the state and understand that it is no simple task to reclaim it once it's been compromised. We've talked about eminent domain, and that discussion has definitely been elevated during the interim study and the ensuing work that we've done on our bills. And again, my bill did have a component in it that deals with eminent domain. You know, I've heard from landowners who have received these letters. I mean there's...try to put yourself in their place. I can't believe there's anything more disturbing than to receive a letter in the mail saying, well, we are going to begin condemnation, the process to take your land. This is...that land is a part of who they are and so I don't think we can minimize the impact that those letters are having on these citizens. And I don't think it's out of line for us to look at our eminent domain laws and how they work or don't work, and so I am committed to continue to do further investigation on that particular issue as well as others that my bill does entail. This is an issue that has received constant media attention.
SENATOR CARLSON: One minute.
SENATOR DUBAS: I think it's great that we're finally having this discussion on the floor of the Legislature. Our citizens deserve that full and fair debate and discussion on this issue. It's up...no matter which side of the issue you're on, it's an issue that's impacting us at the state level. It deserves to have that statewide attention and the Legislature's participation in a discussion, and I am so glad that we are having this discussion today and appreciative of the support that's been given to Senator Sullivan and her bill. One of the things that I've heard on other issues is, well, you know, I've heard on this issue, well, the federal government is there, the federal government will take care of the permits, the federal government will have the adequate protections in place. But I've heard on multiple other issues where the federal government is involved that that's not someone we want to entrust with the best interest of our state or our state's citizens, and I feel very strongly about that in regards to this issue. This is Nebraska. This is Nebraska's environment...
SENATOR CARLSON: Time.
SENATOR DUBAS: ...and we need to look after it. Thank you.
SENATOR CARLSON: Thank you, Senator Dubas. (Visitors introduced.) Senators still wishing to speak include Krist, Wallman, Fulton, Brasch, and others. Senator Krist, you're recognized.
SENATOR KRIST: Thank you, Mr. President. I'm wondering if Senator Langemeier would yield for a question.
SENATOR CARLSON: Senator Langemeier, will you yield?
SENATOR LANGEMEIER: I will.
SENATOR KRIST: The original copy of LB629, as it was introduced by Senator Sullivan, Dubas, and Haar, has been replaced in total by the Natural Resources amendment. Is that correct?
SENATOR LANGEMEIER: If adopted, yes.
SENATOR KRIST: Okay. And the other amendment that's posted on our gadget is introduced by Senator Sullivan, will be pulled or is pulled. Is that correct?
SENATOR LANGEMEIER: It is actually to the bill so it comes after the committee amendments, but our understanding is that will be withdrawn when we get to it.
SENATOR KRIST: Okay. Thank you. So what we're reading in the committee amendment is what we will be voting on today. And I just wanted, for the record, to establish during my time a few things. The first we talked about off the mike and that is that this is not something that begins today. It is anyone who has pipeline, manages pipeline, operates pipeline or leases pipeline that might currently be in the ground in the state of Nebraska and any future pipeline. Is that correct?
SENATOR LANGEMEIER: Correct.
SENATOR KRIST: Okay. Thank you, sir, and thank you for yielding. I passed out to you a black-and-white image. Only Senator Haar can pass out color copies, I understand. So the black and white gives you two white lines that run down. One is dotted and one is solid. Now many of you may have seen this before. There's only one senator in this Chamber that was here when the Keystone pipeline started doing its thing and the countries of Canada and the United States State Department settled on this as a priority for oil and pipeline passing through this country. So for us to imagine that we could have done something before, none of you were here. We have to do what we can do today and we have to do what we can do today moving forward. Now you might ask yourself why the State Department is involved in this kind of negotiation and why we have or we will have these pipelines that will connect. The solid line actually is a factor of Phase I and Phase II, which brings the oil from Hardisty down to refineries that exist in Illinois and connects with a proposed connection that goes down to the Gulf of Mexico, which in essence would be an exporting process if it gets down there, to Port Arthur and to Houston where there are also additional refineries. So just for a matter of record, so that the people of Nebraska understand completely, we're not talking about a new deal here. There's pipeline in the ground. And if you look at where it passes, it will affect aquifers on the eastern edge of Nebraska and does today. The difference is the people in the Sandhills, arguably very protective of their environment and natural resources, feel that passing over or through sand is a much more vulnerable position for the pipeline to go through, and with that I would say, having no engineering background but reading much about the pipeline structure, I would agree, although I'm not qualified to make that assessment. I will tell you, though, and I don't want to make this drama-filled, but as we approach these issues, and I commend Senator Sullivan, Dubas, and Haar for bringing it forward and for Natural Resources to have kicked it out in its present form, but as we move forward, realize many, many, many young people who serve this country...
SENATOR CARLSON: One minute.
SENATOR KRIST: ...have lost their lives in the last three to four decades over a geopolitical concern of oil. Let that sink in for just a second. What we're talking about here is one step closer to geopolitical independence when it comes to the North American continent being able to supply oil and resources into the future. Keep that into perspective, ladies and gentlemen, because I think it's important to bring those young folks home. Thank you again, Senator Sullivan, Dubas, and Haar for bringing it forward and for Natural Resources. I think it's a wonderful first step.
SENATOR CARLSON: Thank you, Senator Krist. Senator Wallman, you're recognized.
SENATOR WALLMAN: Thank you, Mr. President, members of the body. I appreciated Senator Krist's comments. And Canada is a friendly country to the United States of America last time I heard. And I have lots of pipelines in my district, a big storage facility south of town fed by pipelines, and as far as I know there's never been a major catastrophe. But I appreciate Senator Sullivan's bill here and we definitely want to protect the landowners. Would Senator Sullivan yield to a question?
SENATOR CARLSON: Senator Sullivan, would you yield?
SENATOR SULLIVAN: Yes, I will.
SENATOR WALLMAN: And this is in regard to easements. How many years are these easements for, do you know?
SENATOR SULLIVAN: For the life of the pipeline.
SENATOR WALLMAN: Life of the pipeline. So there's no year on there, huh?
SENATOR SULLIVAN: No, uh-uh.
SENATOR WALLMAN: The railroads, if you lease land from them, a lot of times it's 99 years. And so I thank you. And do you feel the landowner is totally protected here, if a catastrophe does occur, with livestock or buildings or...?
SENATOR SULLIVAN: As I said earlier, there's nothing perfect about hardly anything and so,...
SENATOR WALLMAN: Yeah. Yeah.
SENATOR SULLIVAN: ...to that extent, I can't say fully that there's total protection. Secondly, some of it is dependent on the contract that has been agreed upon by the landowner and the pipeline company, and I would hope in all instances that landowner has gone to the greatest extent he or she feels comfortable with legal assistance in the process to put together a really tight contract that protects them. Beyond that, we have minimum standards for reclamation in this bill, and then, whether you want to believe it or not, you have the indication of good will by the company that they will stand behind what they say in terms of protecting the rights of the landowner.
SENATOR WALLMAN: Thank you. And then regards to testifiers, I know some of them that have land in that area, so I appreciate that. But the Chamber of Commerce opposed this. What was their reason?
SENATOR SULLIVAN: Well, I think probably any business entity is looking after the favorable impact that a project like this will have on job development in the state and they want to make sure that nothing stands in the way of that. And I will say, unless you've got some other questions,...
SENATOR WALLMAN: No. Nope. You can expound on that if you'd like.
SENATOR SULLIVAN: You know, I have some constituents in my district that are very excited about the pipeline coming through. You know, it traverses four of the eight counties in my district and there will be jobs created when the pipeline is under construction. To give you an example of a favorable impact for the local public power district, one of the five pumping stations will be located in my district. That pumping station alone will use as much electricity almost as currently used in that public power district. It will double the load. That will mean income for that public power district.
SENATOR WALLMAN: And that is in regard to Senator Karpisek's district also. So the pipeline goes through my southern area and all the people in my area want the pipeline. I haven't heard anybody against it so...but we do have to be careful that we protect the landowners and I appreciate you bringing forth something. And I would yield the rest of my time to Senator Ashford.
SENATOR CARLSON: Senator Ashford, a minute and 20 seconds.
SENATOR ASHFORD: Thank you. Thank you, Mr. President. I don't...and thank you, Senator Wallman. I just...I don't want to talk particularly about the bill and the details, but I was just struck by listening to the discussion this morning how impressed I am with Senator Sullivan. You know, we, all of us, get ourselves involved in issues and sometimes it's easier not to dip our toe in the water at all, just forget about it totally and think it's going to go away. And I was...
SENATOR CARLSON: One minute.
SENATOR ASHFORD: ...I was jotting down some of the...and all of us do this, but just in my experience in the last few years, it was Senator Carlson on the water issues; Senator Langemeier on wind power; my goodness, Senator Lathrop, labor issues; Senator Howard, Dubas, Campbell, McGill on safe haven. I mean we have a tendency to dip our toe in, excuse me, the water. That's not intended to be euphemistic, but in issues that, you know, sometimes it would be a lot more comfortable for us to forget it, just let somebody else do it, or let things go along. That's not our style or that is not...and we are a great Legislature and a great state because of that. So I just want to take a moment just to commend Senator Sullivan for her willingness to put in the work on this issue, and it means a lot, I think, to the entire state certainly, as has been said this morning. Thank you, Mr. President.
SENATOR CARLSON: Thank you, Senator Ashford, Senator Wallman, and Senator Sullivan. Senator Fulton, you're recognized.
SENATOR FULTON: Thank you, Mr. President, members of the body. Would...well, before I ask Senator Sullivan if she'd yield to a question, I want to be fair about this and I'd like the record to reflect what my position is with respect to this pipeline. I am pleased that TransCanada has chosen to come through Nebraska. I just wish they would have chosen a different route. But I'm glad that Senator Sullivan and Senator Wallman were able to get that in the record, there's going to be financial benefit to Nebraska and for that we should be thankful. Okay. Would Senator Sullivan yield to a question?
SENATOR CARLSON: Senator Sullivan, would you yield?
SENATOR SULLIVAN: Yes, I would.
SENATOR FULTON: Okay. With respect to the amendment, which I do support and which I will continue to support, I'd like to get some meaning into the record here. I'm on page 2 of the bill, of the amendment, AM1465. This is in Section 4. It's on...beginning in line 8, "except to the extent another party is determined to be responsible." Could you comment on that? And I'll ask the question, responsible for what?
SENATOR SULLIVAN: Okay. It kind of ties in line with the question that Senator Schumacher had asked earlier and I had given him a page out of the supplemental environmental impact statement that covers liability. And also with respect to my legislation, I think the words that are important with respect to the responsibility of the pipeline company, the words "own," "construct," "operate," and "manage." So any activity under those terms the pipeline company is going to be responsible. Beyond that, whether it's an act of terrorism or whether it's an act of another entity, take for example a power company comes on and wants to construct a transmission line and put some poles in the ground and accidentally injures or causes a problem with the pipeline, then it becomes their responsibility.
SENATOR FULTON: Okay. My concern here, if we go back here, I'll start with Section 4, "A pipeline carrier owning, operating, or managing a pipeline or part of a pipeline for the transportation of oil in this state shall be responsible for all reclamation costs necessary as a result of constructing the pipeline as well as reclamation costs resulting from operating the pipeline, except to the extent another party is determined to be responsible." My concern here is that it may be interpreted that if let's say, for instance, a company who owns a pipeline subleases operation of that pipeline to another company, I don't know if this would occur but it is potential, and there is a problem during operating the pipeline but the problem could be blamed on the company who it was subleased to. Would there be wiggle room in here or would it be your intention to say that "except to the extent another party is determined to be responsible"? Would it be possible for the owner to say, well, that company was operating; we've subleased to them to operate the pipeline and, therefore, we're not responsible. Your intention, would your intention be to allow for that blame to be placed elsewhere or would you say that in that situation the owner of the pipeline should still be responsible?
SENATOR SULLIVAN: Well, I fall back on those words: own, construct, operate, and manage. And "own" is the first one and so my intent is certainly to hold the pipeline company responsible as long as they have any connection to the pipeline whatsoever.
SENATOR FULTON: Okay. Very good. Thank you, Senator. A second question here, this is in line 12 and I'll start with...this is (2) in line 10. "The pipeline carrier shall commence reclamation of the area through which a pipeline is constructed as soon as reasonably practicable after backfill."
SENATOR CARLSON: One minute.
SENATOR FULTON: It seems that the term "backfill" becomes a trigger for financial activity, and not having a definition of "backfill," there may be some ambiguity here. When you hear the word "backfill," does that mean at the point at which that backfill has been completed, the point at which backfill has begun, or could it ever be argued that backfill was never completely attained? Can you give me an idea of what "backfill" means in your mind.
SENATOR SULLIVAN: Well, first of all, the reason that we didn't have any definition for "backfill" is that we decided that that was a reasonably acceptable term, commonly used term in terms of returning whatever had been in that ground prior to putting the pipeline in was what was going to be filled back in and...
SENATOR FULTON: By "backfill," you'd say a plain...the plain language in a plain reading and plain understanding of what "backfill" means, not by any definition that might exist in the engineering realm or by the oil and gas industry but by an average person.
SENATOR CARLSON: Time.
SENATOR SULLIVAN: Exactly.
SENATOR FULTON: Thank you.
SENATOR CARLSON: Thank you, Senator Fulton and Senator Sullivan. Senator Brasch, you're recognized.
SENATOR BRASCH: Thank you, Mr. President. Good morning, body. I stand to share the concerns of constituents on the pipeline, and I thank Senator Sullivan for her diligence in ensuring that we closely look at liability and safeguards and assurances. One of the constituents, we recognized him. It's Bruce Hanson. Him and his wife Kveta were here. But he was also retired and formerly employed by the Nebraska Department of Environmental Quality and he worked there when the first pipeline was built. And he shared with us many things, the fact that we already have one pipeline built for the same purpose. He cited many numerous environmental problems with heavy crude and high-temperature hazardous. He shared with us, posted on the Web site of Environment Canada, about the burst of a pipeline in Saskatchewan that destroyed 28 acres of farmland where nothing survived. He outlines many things. I wanted to also note that an e-mail from Stanton County, where the Hansons are from, they talk about an abandoned pipeline that exists, the problems with it, also a pipeline built in 2009, unable to have prompt attention to pipeline at risk due to flooding. You know, these are situations. Not only did they copy 20 of us senators, they also sent a copy to the President, very concerned. Another constituent from Burt County came in and that's where these fine pictures have come from. I believe Senator Haar sent out duplicates. Graham Christensen from Burt County and also the public affairs director of Nebraska Farmers Union, he has spent hours upon hours of research. There are many, many concerns, the land that we are putting at risk, the water we are putting at risk. I believe Senator Avery brought up some very good questions as well. I urge the body to consider carefully, as we move forward, what options we can offer, as Senator Avery offered the body. Thank you.
SENATOR CARLSON: Thank you, Senator Brasch. Those still wishing to speak include Smith, Harms, Ken Haar, Bloomfield, Pirsch, and others. Senator Smith, you're recognized.
SENATOR SMITH: Thank you, Mr. President, and good morning, colleagues. As a member of the Natural Resources Committee, as a probusiness person and as an admirer of our state's natural resources, I stand in support of AM1465 and the underlying bill, LB629. I want to just give some recognition to Senator Sullivan in the way she's conducted herself throughout the discussions with the committee, outside of the committee. She has truly acted as a statesperson on this matter and I believe her constituents and the people of Nebraska should be very, very proud of her leadership. But also I want to recognize Senator Langemeier. He's devoted considerable time and patience to this. At every turn, he did not demonstrate any type of partiality in trying to find a reasonable solution to this issue and I think we should all be very proud of his leadership as well as committee Chairman of the Natural Resources Committee. And then finally I'd like to...I'd be remiss not to recognize the benefit of jobs and energy independence that TransCanada and other pipeline companies bring to our communities and bring to our country. We have to find safe and reliable ways to exploit the natural resources we have available in this country. And while there's a lot of attention  given to renewables, renewables certainly have a place but also fossil  products have to be considered here and we have to find a safe and  reliable means of getting at those resources. You know, we talk about highway funding as an economic driver in our state and potential for growth in commerce. We talk about small business assistance. There's been a lot of that going around throughout this legislative session, some I don't think necessarily hits the target that it's intended to hit. But, nonetheless, there's a lot of talk about supporting small businesses. But what greater assistance is there to our businesses than energy independence and energy supply? And, you know, in my experience through multiple hearings and discussions on this particular issue, I believe that the pipeline companies have indicated that they very much want to do their best to be good neighbors and Senator Sullivan noted that that is very critical to be good neighbors. She mentioned that in her opening remarks and I agree with that and I believe these companies have at least demonstrated to me and they have been very forthcoming in answering all of my questions concerning the construction methods and the safety and response methods they have in place, and I do believe that they have demonstrated that they want to be good neighbors to Nebraskans and I believe that they will be very good neighbors to Nebraskans. I echo what Senator Adams spoke earlier about TransCanada's responsiveness to his questions and I have found the very same thing. I believe that they've been very helpful and forthcoming. So once again, I do support Senator Sullivan's thoughtful and measured approach with her bill and Senator Langemeier's amendment to this bill. I support both and I encourage my colleagues to support both. Thank you very much.
SENATOR CARLSON: Thank you, Senator Smith. Senator Harms, you're recognized.
SENATOR HARMS: Thank you, Mr. President, colleagues. You know, when this first came forward that this pipeline was going to come through Nebraska many, many months ago, I really started to struggle a little bit with the pipeline and even some of our people in my district struggled a little bit with it, and my biggest concern was always about what happens with the water. I know today we're talking about the land and we're going to return it to its same beauty that it was before if something happens, but my concern was always about what happens when a leak occurs in the Ogallala aquifer. Colleagues, that's the biggest sum of pure water captured underground in the world. It's our biggest asset. It's what our future is about in regard to this particular concern. And so I thought, well, if that's my concern then why don't you find out just exactly what happens to the aquifer. So I went to a water scientist who specializes in water and asked him, here's my concern, my issue, how do I deal with this, how do I deal with my constituents who are asking me these kinds of questions? He said, John, when you look at how this works, he said, if you had a spill in there you don't have to worry about the spill because, he said, in time bacteria will clean it up and purify it. Well, even that thought didn't make me feel real good, the fact that oil may still be there but in time it would be taken care of and most likely would be purified. He said, what you have to be more concerned about will be...first of all, the Ogallala aquifer does not move very rapid or, if it moves at all, it's very, very slow. So that's the other side of this in regard to the discussion with the scientist. Then I asked him, well, what happens then if it gets near an underground water river or close to a river? He said, that's then where your problem begins because that's where the water is going to move rapid and that's where you will have an issue with that. And I guess as I struggled a little bit with this and I listened to the conversation today, I've listened to it with my own constituents, and I would have to tell you, colleagues, it's probably split in my district because of the Sandhills and the beauty of the Sandhills and the Ogallala aquifer and how important that is to us in the future. I finally made a decision to support this. I think it's important for us. I think what Senator Sullivan has done and Senator Dubas has done is great. And I know that in a short conversation I had with Senator Sullivan it doesn't go far enough. But you know what? We have to start somewhere and this is a start. And I can tell you, I think both of these two senators will come back and they will continue to work on this, and by the time we get out of here, when our terms are up, I think we'll be in pretty good position and shape. So even though I had some concerns in the beginning, I still have some of those same concerns. I trust what the scientists have told me, and I think this is the best for what we have to do in this great state. So I would really urge you to support AM1465 and the underlying bill, LB629. So I thank you. Thank you, Mr. President.
SENATOR CARLSON: Thank you, Senator Harms. Senator Haar, you're recognized.
SENATOR HAAR: Mr. President, members of the body, first of all, Senator Krist, after you've been in the Legislature for two years you can get color copies too. It's just a matter of priority. I'd like to see us vote on this so I'll try and make this my last time. I'd like to talk a little bit more on Select File. But the great communicator Ronald Reagan often, not just once, often said: trust but verify. Three words: trust but verify. What we're talking about here is not antibusiness, it's not anti anything. It's trust but verify. The two pictures I handed out are from a Lincoln Journal Star article that appeared on April 22, 2011, and it is about a gas pipeline. But in that respect, when it comes to reclamation, a pipeline is a pipeline. And what happened here, according to the Journal Star is that the reclamation started in the wintertime and there was snow on the ground and so they just pushed the snow and the dirt back into the trench and, guess what, the snow melted and left the trench. Trust but verify. The person from the pipeline company said it was because of environmental concerns that they got started so late, mostly over nesting birds, so they had a reason to push that snow back in the trench, I guess. Trust but verify. Again, I stand in strong support of LB629 and AM1465. It is a great start. It's an important bill and we need to get started here. But again, I want to talk briefly, go back to the Tenth Amendment where I left off. We do have siting authority; we just haven't assigned that and it's something we're going to have to work on. It's strange. When we talked to Senator Nelson's office and Senator Johanns and to the congresspeople, they pointed us to the constitution: The powers not delegated to the United States by the constitution or prohibited by it to the states are reserved for the states respectively or to the people. That's the Tenth Amendment. In South Dakota, for example, another...okay, so we do have siting authority if we assign it to somebody, and that's something we're going to work on this summer. Other states have it. There is also not liability in this bill. Let me tell you, South Dakota has laws that require strict liability for corrective actions. So if there's an oil spill on the border between Nebraska and South Dakota, South Dakota citizens will be protected because South Dakota has strict liability built into their laws. So we need to look at liability this summer. Eminent domain, we need to look at eminent domain. I have some actual letters here, and all this stuff is crossed out because we don't want to get anybody in trouble, but I think that this company, trust but verify, has used eminent domain under false pretexts. Let me read from a letter to one of the people: We prefer to acquire this property through negotiation and voluntary settlement. Great. We will initiate eminent domain only as a last resort where good faith has not resulted in a voluntary agreement. This letter represents our final offer and we will remain open for one month. This was sent on...dated April 7, so the month is up. After the date of this letter or until you reject it, which ever is...after that period we will initiate...
SENATOR CARLSON: One minute.
SENATOR HAAR: ...thank you...the eminent domain process. So they're saying they can actually do eminent domain before the siting has been approved by the State Department. We have a lot of work to do. There are some issues that I think we need to get on top of now instead of waiting. I've introduced a study resolution to study fracking, which is getting natural gas out of the ground, in-situ mining, because we have almost no regulation on these and these are going to be coming at us. And I will be circulating a letter. You could sign it if you'd like but it's going to go to Secretary Clinton backing up what Senator Johanns and Nelson have said, that please reroute around the Sandhills. So again, I want to thank Senator Sullivan and the Natural Resources Committee. This is important legislation. We have a lot of work ahead of us in terms of other legislation. Thank you very much.
SENATOR CARLSON: Thank you, Senator Haar. Senator Bloomfield, you're recognized.
SENATOR BLOOMFIELD: Thank you, Mr. President. Colleagues, I want to step up with everybody else and thank Senator Sullivan for bringing this first-step bill. I know she'll work further on it. But I want to lead us down a little bit different path this morning. We're talking about pipelines going across our great state. We ponied up earlier this year $25 million to the college for Innovation Campus. We have extended money to the ethanol people. I wonder if maybe it isn't about time that the state look at maybe being involved in or helping someone establish a refinery in western Nebraska. We're all the time talking about let's do something to help revitalize western Nebraska. We have the rail system out there. Alliance has one of the most fabulous rail yards in the country. I think perhaps we'd ought to look at putting some money out there through some state organization or in cooperation with private enterprise people. I know it's a long struggle to build a refinery but I also know there's a great shortage of refineries in the United States. I believe there's a golden opportunity to stop the pipeline from going across Nebraska and have them come to Nebraska, and I would sure like to work with anybody else that's of a like mind in seeing about getting something like that going. Thank you.
SENATOR CARLSON: Thank you, Senator Bloomfield. Senator Pirsch, you're recognized.
SENATOR PIRSCH: Thank you, Mr. President, members of the body. I have, with respect to...I appreciate the dialogue that's been going on this afternoon and the points that have been raised and I'm sure that this conversation will continue. I wonder if Senator Sullivan might yield to a question or two.
SENATOR CARLSON: Senator Sullivan, will you yield?
SENATOR SULLIVAN: Yes, I will.
SENATOR PIRSCH: Thank you, Senator. And I take it that this planned construction of this site is going to be somewhat dependent upon federal authorization. Is that right?
SENATOR SULLIVAN: Absolutely. If you're talking about the Keystone XL pipeline, that permitting process is still in process. It has not been completed so they've not been given their final permits.
SENATOR PIRSCH: Okay. Has it been...so there's a chance that it may or may not go through. It's under federal review at this point. Is that correct?
SENATOR SULLIVAN: Right.
SENATOR PIRSCH: Okay. And is there an expectation then as to the date of construction, starting construction, if it is approved or is that very much unknown at this time as well?
SENATOR SULLIVAN: What I have been told and what I've read is that they are hopeful that they will still be given the permits by the end of the year, and if that's the case, construction would start next year.
SENATOR PIRSCH: I see. Okay. Well, with respect to...and this may be in an area that...I hate to put you on the spot, it's a legalistic area and I don't know that this has been looked at by the committee, but the issue of eminent domain has been raised and I'm wondering, you know, the courts have in recent years expanded the purview of eligible uses of land in terms of governmental interest in using eminent domain. Do we know, is this a black-and-white issue as to whether or not TransCanada would have a power to utilize eminent domain if they were...what exactly is the...I guess it would hinge on what authority are they being granted by the federal government, this...it's permitting only or is...after this interaction with the federal government, do they arguably have the power to exercise eminent domain?
SENATOR SULLIVAN: You know, Senator, not to evade your question but I am not an expert on eminent domain. Certainly that's an area that we need to work on in the broad perspective of pipelines. I can't tell you what...if they are overreaching their step in using eminent domain in this process because they haven't received their permit, I can't say that for sure. So I just don't know.
SENATOR PIRSCH: Very good. Well, it's an issue I'm sure that will be looked at. And I do appreciate all the conversation, the issues that have been raised thus far. And I think, Senator Fulton, I appreciate your comments as well. The only thing I'd close is I would just like to thank you, Senator Sullivan, for bringing this bill to this body and, you know, there has...you know, does...Senator Haar brought out the thesaurus in talking about your quality, your attributes in determination, persistency, tenacity, but I think we could probably go on and on. You represent your district very well. So thank you. I'd yield the balance of my time.
SENATOR CARLSON: Thank you, Senator Pirsch. Senator Hadley, you're recognized.
SENATOR HADLEY: Mr. President, members of the body, I'm going to be very quick. I just had some random thoughts of...after listening to people. I do want to thank Senator Sullivan for bringing this bill. I think it is a step. But I had some random thoughts and looked some things up. Right now, there are 20,100 miles of pipeline buried in Nebraska--20,100 miles already buried in Nebraska, all throughout Nebraska. I was going to send this out but I didn't want to waste the paper. Nebraska is an interstate natural gas supply dependency state and if you look at the natural gas lines in Nebraska, they crisscross the Ogallala aquifer, they crisscross all the aquifers, the streams and such as that. There has been 3,000 natural gas accidents since 1900...1990. The last thing I'd like to say, and someone mentioned we want the pipeline but we just want it moved, it reminds me of my days back on the city council. We had a saying, I'm sure some of you have heard it, but it's called NIMBY. NIMBY means not in my backyard. It means that we really like this project but we'd like for you to move it into somebody else's backyard. We'd like you to move it into somebody else's state. I think we need to have a balancing act. I think we need to have expectations of what we expect the pipeline to do, but we also have to understand the importance of the pipeline to the national dependency on oil and what we're looking for long term. And I think Senator Sullivan's bill is a start to that. Thank you, Mr. President.
SENATOR CARLSON: Thank you, Senator Hadley. Senator Dubas, you're recognized.
SENATOR DUBAS: Thank you, Mr. President, just a couple of clarifying remarks and then I won't speak anymore. I will be sending out a link, an e-mail to all of the senators, where you can access the supplemental environmental impact statement so that you can see what TransCanada is doing as far as meeting and exceeding any types of regulations or protections that they're putting in place. In the interest of fairness, I think we need to put all the information out there that we have available to us, so I will be sending that link out to all of you to access and would encourage you to look at it. It can be a lengthy document but it has a lot of very good information in it. My office has looked through it too. And in reference to the handout that I did pass out...and again, in all fairness, it's not necessarily an apples-to-apples comparison and it's definitely not comprehensive. It could be classified as an oversimplification. Just trying to make a point about, okay, these are the federal regulations, what can or should the state put in place. So, you know, this isn't...the handout that I gave you is not, you know, the be-all and end-all of the regulations that natural gas pipelines have to comply with versus what the crude oil and oil pipelines comply with. They're different animals and they are dealt with under a different set of circumstances. But I do want to try to be fair and balanced so, again, if you go to that supplemental environmental impact statement you will be able to see most if not all of the regulations and compliance issues that TransCanada is going through. As I said, it's a very informative document and I think you will learn something from it. So I will be sending that out to all of you, and should you have any questions, please don't hesitate to get in touch with my office. We have multiple notebooks filled with lots of information. So thank you very much, Mr. President.
SENATOR CARLSON: Thank you, Senator Dubas. There are no other senators wishing to speak. Senator Langemeier, you're recognized to close on AM1465.
SENATOR LANGEMEIER: Mr. President, members of the body, I want to thank Senator Sullivan for her work on this bill. We've had some great discussions and we've got to know each other a little bit through this whole process, which as been good. And so we would ask for your adoption of AM1465 and then the adoption of LB629. I think it is that first good step. Thank you.
SENATOR CARLSON: Thank you, Senator Langemeier. Members, the question is, shall the committee amendments to LB629 be adopted? All those in favor vote yea; all opposed vote nay. Have all voted who wish to vote? Record, Mr. Clerk.
CLERK: 45 ayes, 0 nays, Mr. President, on adoption of committee amendments.
SENATOR CARLSON: The amendment is adopted. Mr. Clerk.
CLERK: Senator Sullivan, I have AM238 with a note you want to withdraw.
SENATOR CARLSON: The amendment is withdrawn.
CLERK: I have nothing further on the bill, Mr. President.
SENATOR CARLSON: We return to any debate on LB629. Seeing no lights, Senator Sullivan, you're recognized to close.
SENATOR SULLIVAN: Thank you, Mr. President. And I do thank the body for their discussion and certainly their support of the committee amendment. As I've indicated several times, I've worked long and hard on this legislation. Is it enough? No. Is it a work in progress? Yes. Is it a compromise? Yes. Is it the end of the beginning? Absolutely, and I would appreciate your green vote. Thank you.
SENATOR CARLSON: Thank you, Senator Sullivan. Members, you've heard the closing on LB629. The question is, shall LB629 be advanced? All in favor vote yea; all opposed vote nay. Record, Mr. Clerk.
CLERK: 47 ayes, 0 nays, Mr. President, on the advancement of LB629.
(...)