## Keystone XL Pipeline Permit Determination

Press Statement

John Kerry

Secretary of State

Washington, DC

November 6, 2015

After a thorough review of the record, including extensive analysis
conducted by the State Department, I have determined that the
national interest of the United States would be best served by
denying TransCanada a presidential permit for the Keystone XL
pipeline. President Obama agrees with this determination and the
eight federal agencies consulted under Executive Order 13337 have
accepted it.

Executive Order 13337 delegates to the Secretary of State the
President’s authority to issue or deny Presidential Permits like
the one sought for the proposed Keystone XL pipeline. In reaching
my decision, I evaluated information provided by TransCanada, the
Supplemental Environmental Impact Statement, the views of other
federal agencies, and nearly five million public comments.

I based this decision on key findings by the State Department, notably:

* The proposed project has a negligible impact on our energy security.

* The proposed project would not lead to lower gas prices for American
consumers.

* The proposed project’s long-term contribution to our economy
would be marginal.

* The proposed project raises a range of concerns about the impact
on local communities, water supplies, and cultural heritage sites.

* The proposed project would facilitate transportation into our
country of a particularly dirty source of fuel.

The critical factor in my determination was this: moving forward with
this project would significantly undermine our ability to continue
leading the world in combatting climate change.

I am also convinced that public arguments for and against the pipeline
have, to some extent, been overstated. Our analysis makes it clear
that the Keystone XL pipeline would not be the economic driver it is
heralded to be.

On the other hand, while it would facilitate the transportation to the
United States of one of the dirtiest sources of fuel on the planet,
the proposed project by itself is unlikely to significantly impact
the level of crude extraction or the continued demand for heavy crude
oil at refineries in the United States.

The reality is that this decision could not be made solely on the
numbers – jobs that would be created, dirty fuel that would be
transported here, or carbon pollution that would ultimately be
unleashed.

As Secretary of State, I fully recognize the importance of this
project to Canada, one of our closest strategic allies and energy
trading partners. We consulted with our Canadian friends and I spoke
with Foreign Minister Dion today regarding this decision. While we
understand the impact of this decision on Canada, I am confident that
our close and long-standing relationship with Canada will continue
to grow stronger in the years ahead.

The United States needs to prioritize the development of renewable
energy opportunities and continue to transition to the kind of jobs
that better utilize our skilled manufacturing base. Clean energy is not
just the solution to climate change; it’s also one of the greatest
economic opportunities the world has ever seen. If we continue to
make smart choices, American businesses – and American workers –
stand to benefit enormously.

Decades of science prove beyond any reasonable doubt that human
activity is a direct cause of the rising seas, increasing temperatures,
and intensifying storms threatening our planet – and the window of
opportunity for action to prevent the worst impacts of climate change
is closing quickly. I have seen the world try and fail to address this
threat for decades. Today, the need for American leadership to combat
climate change has never been greater, and we must answer the call.

The United States cannot ask other nations to make tough choices
to address climate change if we are unwilling to make them
ourselves. Denying the Keystone XL pipeline is one of those tough
choices – but it is the right decision, for America and the world.
