¢ TransCanada

In business to deliver

450 - 1* Street SW

Calgary, Alberta, Canada T2P SH1

Kristine L. Delkus

tel 403.920.2161

fax 403.920.2409

email kristine_delkus@transcanada.com

web www.transcanada.com



September 19, 2008

Mr. J. Brian Duggan

Energy Officer, Room 4843

Bureau of Economic, Energy and Business Affairs

United States Department of State

2201 C Street, NW

EB/SC/IEC

Room 7525

Washington, DC 20520

Dear Mr. Duggan:

Re: TransCanada Keystone Pipeline, L.P.

Application for Presidential Permit

Enclosed for filing are the original and four electronic copies of the
Application of TransCanada Keystone Pipeline, L.P. for a Presidential
Permit Authorizing the Construction, Operation, and Maintenance of
Pipeline Facilities for the Importation of Crude Oil to be Located at
the United States-Canada Border. Authorization to construct, operate,
and maintain the border crossing facilities is being requested in
connection with Keystone’s proposed international pipeline project
(the “Keystone XL Project”), which is designed to transport
crude oil production from the Western Canadian Sedimentary Basin
to existing markets in the Texas Gulf Coast area.  Keystone submits
that its proposed pipeline will serve the national interests of the
United States by providing a secure and reliable source of Canadian
crude oil to meet the growing demand by refineries and markets in
the United States.

Enclosed with Keystone’s Presidential Permit application is a
preliminary Environmental Report, which is intended to provide the
Department of State with sufficient environmental information to
appreciate the nature and scope of the proposed project and its
potential environmental impacts. This information is intended to
permit the Department of State and other affected federal agencies to
determine the lead federal agency for the environmental review required
under the National Environmental Policy Act (“NEPA”). Keystone
has conducted, and continues to conduct, extensive environmental and
cultural field surveys in 2008 and intends to supplement the instant
application and preliminary Environmental Report with more complete
environmental and cultural studies, data, and analyses in supplemental
Environmental Reports to be filed in November 2008, and in June 2009.

The application is further accompanied by Appendices A and B,
as follows:

* Appendix A  - Pipeline Route Maps

* Appendix B  - Transmission Supply Routemaps

In addition to the original and four copies, Keystone is providing
eight electronic copies for distribution to the Departments shown
below, in accordance with Executive Order 13337. If you have questions
regarding the Keystone application or require additional copies,
please call Jim White at (703) 680-7774.

Yours truly,

Pons  Dee

Kristine L. Delkus

Deputy General Counsel

Pipelines & Regulatory Affairs

cc: Department of Defense

Department of Justice

Department of Interior

Department of Commerce

Department of Transportation

Department of Energy

Department of Homeland Security

Environmental Protection Agency

Presidential Permit Application

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA

DEPARTMENT OF STATE

TRANSCANADA KEYSTONE PIPELINE, L.P.    )  No.

APPLICATION OF TRANSCANADA KEYSTONE PIPELINE, L.P.

FOR A PRESIDENTIAL PERMIT AUTHORIZING THE

CONSTRUCTION, OPERATION, AND MAINTENANCE

OF PIPELINE FACILITIES FOR THE IMPORTATION OF

CRUDE OIL TO BE LOCATED AT THE UNITED STATES-CANADA BORDER

Pursuant to Executive Order  11423, 33 Fed. Reg. 11714 (Aug. 16,
1968), as amended, and Executive Order 13337, 69 Fed. Reg. 25229
(Apr. 30, 2004), TransCanada Keystone Pipeline, L.P. (“Keystone”)
hereby submits its application to the United States Department of State
(“Department of State”) for a Presidential Permit authorizing the
construction, operation, and maintenance of certain pipeline facilities
for the importation of crude oil, to be located at the international
border between the United States and Canada, at Phillips County,
Montana  (the “border crossing facilities”), as more  fully
described herein. Authorization to construct, operate, and maintain
the border crossing facilities is being requested in connection with
Keystone’s proposed international pipeline project — the Keystone
XL Project (“Project”) -- which is designed to transport crude oil
production from the Western Canadian  Sedimentary Basin (“WCSB”) to
existing markets in the Texas Gulf Coast area.  Keystone submits that
its proposed pipeline will serve the national interests of the United
States by providing a secure and reliable supply of Canadian  crude
oil to meet the growing demand  by refineries and markets in the US.

The instant filing contains the non-environmental information required
to support a Presidential Permit application and a preliminary
Environmental Report, which is

1

intended to provide the Department of State with sufficient
environmental information to appreciate the nature and scope of
the proposed Project and its potential environmental impacts. This
information is intended to permit the Department  of State and
other affected agencies to determine the lead federal agency for
the environmental review of the Project required under the National
Environmental Policy Act (“NEPA”). 42 U.S.C.  §§ 4321, et
seg. Keystone has conducted, and continues to conduct, extensive
environmental and cultural field surveys in 2008 and intends to
supplement the instant application and preliminary Environmental
Report with more complete environmental and cultural studies, data,
and analyses in supplemental Environmental Reports to be filed on or
about November 19, 2008, and in June 2009.

I. IDENTIFYING INFORMATION

Communications and correspondence with respect to this application
should be directed to the following persons:

Kristine L. Delkus   James P. White

TransCanada PipeLines Limited  TransCanada

Deputy General Counsel  Associate General Counsel

Pipelines and Regulatory Affairs Pipelines and Regulatory Affairs

450 1" Street, S.W.   4547 Rincon Place

Calgary, Alberta   Montclair, VA 22025

Canada T2P 5H1   (703) 680-7774

(403) 920-2161   jim_p_white@transcanada.com

kristine_delkus@transcanada.com

The identity of the applicant is TransCanada Keystone Pipeline, L.P., a
limited partnership, organized under the laws of the State of Delaware,
and owned equally by affiliates of TransCanada Corporation, a Canadian
public company organized under the laws of Canada, and ConocoPhillips
Company, a Delaware corporation. Keystone’s primary business address
is 450 1" Street, S.W., Calgary, Alberta, Canada T2P SH1.

2

TransCanada PipeLines Ltd. (“TransCanada”) will be the operator
of the Project.  TransCanada has more than 50 years experience in
the responsible development    and reliable and safe operation of
North American energy infrastructure including natural gas pipelines,
power generation, gas storage facilities, and projects related to
oil pipelines and liquefied natural gas facilities. TransCanada owns
and operates a natural gas pipeline network of more than 36,500
miles, which taps into virtually all major natural gas supply
basins in North America.  TransCanada transports the majority of
western Canada’s natural gas production across the North American
continent to markets in the United States and Canada. Further,
TransCanada is in the execution phase of the $5.2 billion Keystone
Pipeline project, a major international crude oil pipeline project.
The Mainline segment of the Keystone Pipeline project, which extends
from the North Dakota-Canada border to Wood River and Patoka, Illinois;
and the Keystone Cushing Extension, which extends from Steele City,
Nebraska, to Cushing, Oklahoma, are on schedule for completion in
2009 and 2010, respectively.

TransCanada has total assets of approximately US $30 billion. For
the year ended December 31, 2007, TransCanada had a net income
from continuing operations of approximately US $1.2 billion and
cash flow of approximately US $2.84 billion.  Attached as Exhibit
A is a summary document demonstrating TransCanada’s fitness to
develop, construct, and operate the Project as a major cross-border
pipeline system.  TransCanada Keystone Pipeline, L.P. is 50
percent owned  by ConocoPhillips Company. ConocoPhillips is the
third-largest integrated energy company in the United States, based
on market capitalization, as well as reserves of oil and natural gas.
Worldwide, of non-government-controlled companies, ConocoPhillips is
the sixth-largest

3

holder of proved reserves and the fifth-largest refiner.  Headquartered
in Houston, Texas, ConocoPhillips operates in nearly 40 countries and
has approximately 33,100 employees worldwide. The company has assets of
$190 billion.  ConocoPh illips stock is listed on the New York Stock
Exchange under the symbol “COP”.  ConocoPhillips operates more
than 11,000 miles of pipelines and more than 60 storage terminals in
the United States.  ConocoPhillips transports both raw and finished
petroleum products, including crude oil, propane and refined products
such as gasoline, diesel and jet fuel.

II. DESCRIPTION OF FACILITY

Keystone is requesting a Presidential  Permit solely with respect to
the limited border crossing segment of its international Project.
The border crossing facilities are defined as a 1.2 mile segment
of 36-inch diameter pipeline extending downstream from the United
States border, in Phillips County, Montana to the first pipeline
isolation valve, which is located at Mile Post  1.2 where the first
pump  station in the United States is proposed to be located.

Exhibit B attached hereto shows: (i) a pipeline route map reflecting
the location of the border crossing facilities; (ii) an engineering
drawing depicting the border crossing; and (iii) photos of the
proposed construction site.  In lieu of owning the construction
site for the border crossing facilities, Keystone plans to acquire
pipeline right-of-way easements from the landowners along the route
of the border crossing facilities.'   These

1. With respect to the entire pipeline Project itself, Keystone will
acquire easements granting it the right to construct and operate
the pipeline. For certain above-ground facilities, such as pumping
stations and valve sites, Keystone will acquire the sites in fee.

4

easement agreements will grant Keystone the rights to construct,
operate, and maintain the border crossing facilities. The technical
specifications of the line pipe to be utilized for the border crossing
facilities, and the Project as a whole, are set forth in Exhibit
C hereto.

The border crossing facilities are intended to transport crude oil as
an integral part of the proposed Project, an international project,
which is designed to transport crude production from the WCSB  to
markets in the United States. Specifically, Keystone proposes to
construct and operate a crude oil pipeline and related facilities from
Hardisty, Alberta, Canada to the Texas Gulf Coast area.  The Project
will be designed to transport up to approximately 900,000 barrels per
day (bpd) of crude oil received from an oil supply hub near Hardisty,
to existing terminals in the Nederland and Houston, Texas areas.

In the United States, the Project will consist of 1,375 miles of new
36-inch diameter pipeline, in three segments:

* The approximately 850-mile long “Steele City” segment from the
US border to Steele City, Nebraska;

* The approximately 478-mile long “Gulf Coast” segment from
Cushing, Oklahoma to Nederland, Texas; and * The approximately 47-mile
long “Houston Lateral” segment from Liberty County, Texas, to
the Moore Junction area in Harris County, Texas.

The Project is planned to be placed into service in phases. The Gulf
Coast segment is planed to be in service by the second quarter of
2011  and the Steele City segment planned to be in service by the
first quarter of 2012.

5

There will be 33 pump stations along the pipeline route in the US.
The pipeline will connect with the Keystone Pipeline project at the
northernmost point of the Keystone Cushing Extension at Steele City,
Nebraska, and at the southernmost point of the Keystone Cushing
Extension at its Cushing, Oklahoma terminus.   Attached as Appendix
A hereto are detailed route maps depicting the preferred route of
the proposed Project.

In Canada, approximately 327 miles of new 36-inch pipeline will be
constructed from Hardisty, Alberta to Monchy, Saskatchewan where
it will cross into Phillips County, Montana.  As discussed below at
Section VII, review and approval of the proposed Canadian facilities
will be subject to the jurisdiction of the Canadian National Energy
Board (“NEB”) as well as various local, municipal, and provincial
authorities.

III. NATIONAL INTEREST

As noted, the Project would commence at the crude oil supply hub
near Hardisty, Alberta, Canada and terminate near existing crude
oil storage terminal facilities near Nederland and Houston, Texas.
The purpose of the Project is to transport crude oil production from
the WCSB to meet growing demand by refineries and markets in the
United States. Construction of the Project, including the proposed
border crossing facilities, will serve the national interest of the
United States by providing US refineries and markets with access to
a substantial, secure, and reliable supply of Canadian crude oil to
meet increasing US demand for petroleum products.

The need for the project is dictated by a number of factors including:

*  Increasing WCSB crude oil supply; * *  Increasing crude oil demand
in the United States; * *  Decreasing domestic crude supply in the
United States; * *  An opportunity to reduce US dependence on foreign
offshore oil supply through further supply diversification to stable,
secure Canadian crude supplies; and

*  Demonstrated shipper interest in the Project.

Established crude oil reserves in the WCSB are estimated at 179
billion barrels (Canadian Association of Petroleum Producers (CAPP),
January, 2008).  The primary source of WCSB crude oil supply --
over 97 percent -- is comprised of Canada's vast oil sands reserves
located in north-eastern Alberta. The Energy Resource Conservation
Board of Alberta estimates there are 175 billion barrels of established
reserves out of 315 billion barrels of bitumen ultimately recoverable
in Canada’s oil sands. Alberta has the second largest crude oil
reserves in the world, second only to Saudi Arabia.

As a result of growing production from the oil sands, crude oil
supplies from the WCSB are expected to increase by about 1.6 million
barrels per day (bpd) by 2017, from current production of about 2.4
million bpd (CAPP, June, 2008). CAPP’s high forecast estimates
potential growth of over 1.9 million bpd over the same 10 year
timeframe.

According to the US Energy Information Administration (EIA), US demand
for petroleum products has increased by over 11 percent or two million
bpd over the past 10 years and is expected to increase further. The
EIA estimates that total US petroleum consumption is projected to
increase by approximately 1.0 million bpd over the next 10 years
(EIA Annual Energy Outlook 2008), representing average demand growth
of about 100,000 bpd per year. At the same time, domestic US crude
supplies continue to decline.  For example, over the past 10 years,
domestic crude production in the US has declined at an average rate
of about 135,000 bpd per year or two percent per year.

7

The US historically has compensated for decreases in domestic
production through increased imports from Canada and foreign offshore
sources. Canada is currently the largest supplier of imported crude oil
and refined products to the United States, supplying over 2.2 million
bpd in 2008 and representing over 11 percent of total US petroleum
product consumption (DOE Petroleum Supply Monthly, April 2008).

US imports of foreign crude and refined products continue to increase
as a result of decreasing domestic production and increasing demand.
Crude and refined petroleum product imports into the US have increased
by over 3.3 million bpd over the past 10 years. In 2007, the US
imported over 13.4 million bpd of crude oil and petroleum products
or over 60 percent of total US petroleum product consumption.

The Project’s key delivery area, Petroleum Administration for
Defense District (PADD) III, or the US Gulf Coast, represents the
largest and most complex refining district in the United States with
49 refineries comprising approximately eight million bpd of total
refining capacity. The Project would provide an opportunity for
US refiners in PADD III to diversify supply away from traditional
offshore foreign crude supply and to obtain direct pipeline access
to secure and growing Canadian crude supplies.   Access to Canadian
crude supply would also provide an opportunity for the US to supplement
annual declines in domestic crude production and, more significantly,
decrease its dependence on foreign crude supplies, particularly from
Mexico and Venezuela, the top two heavy crude oil importers into the
US Gulf Coast.

Shippers — producers, marketers or refiners -- evaluate the merits
of various pipeline proposals and ultimately decide which projects
to support. Shippers have

8

expressed material interest in the Project and in securing additional
crude oil pipeline capacity. Shippers have already committed to
binding contracts totalling 300,000 bpd in support of the Project.
These commitments are sufficient to enable Keystone to proceed
with regulatory applications and, pending successful regulatory
and environmental approvals, with construction of the proposed
Project. These binding commitments demonstrate a material endorsement
of support for the Project, its economics, proposed route, and target
market, as well as the need for incremental pipeline capacity and
access to Canadian crude supplies.  Most recently, Keystone conducted
a binding Open Season to provide shippers an opportunity to commit
additional volumes to the Project.  Keystone concluded its Open
Season for the Project on September 4, 2008.    Keystone currently
is evaluating the results of that Open Season.

IV. SIMILAR FACILITIES

The nearest similar facilities to the proposed border crossing
facilities are those of the Express Pipeline system.  Those facilities
cross the border approximately 100 miles west of the proposed
Project. Because of the distance, the Express facilities are not shown
on any maps  of the proposed Project; however, the Express facilities
may be identified on any commercial crude oil map.

V. CONSTRUCTION PLAN

Plans for construction of the Project are discussed generally in
the preliminary Environmental Report attached hereto.  In addition,
Keystone is developing a detailed Construction Mitigation and
Reclamation Plan (“CMR Plan”) for the Project, which will be
submitted with the supplemental  Environmental Report on November  19,
2008.  Permitting, approvals, and financing are discussed elsewhere
in this application and the attached  preliminary Environmental
Report. Specific problems anticipated in the development and
construction of the facility and an indication of how they might be
resolved will be addressed in the supplemental Environmental Reports
to be submitted in November 2008 and June 2009 and will be further
addressed in the CMR Plan.

VI.  FINANCING AND RATES

The capital cost of the US portion of the Project, from the U.S-Canada
border to the Gulf Coast is estimated to be US $5.443 billion. While
project financing has yet to be finalized, the project is anticipated
to be financed through a combination of contributions from the owners,
bank financing, and access to capital markets.

The rates for crude oil transportation through the US portion of
the Project will be subject to regulation by the Federal Energy
Regulatory Commission (“FERC”).  Keystone anticipates there will
be two categories of services offered:

1)  Committed or term service — Keystone is proposing long-term
contracts with discounted rates and a fixed/variable rate design. The
rates vary with contract term, with lower rates offered for longer
terms. The fixed portion of the rate is based on levelized 10, 15, or
20-year contracts and will not change over the term of the shipper’s
contract. The fixed portion of the rate is designed to recover the
capital invested and is designed on a postage stamp basis. The variable
portion of the rate is a flow-through of the actual operating costs,
adjusted annually.

2)  Uncommitted or spot service — Keystone will offer service to
non-contract shippers on a month-to-month basis at a posted spot rate.
The spot rate will be subject to indexing, as permitted by FERC.

VII. CANADIAN APPROVALS

The Canadian portion of the Project will cross provincial and
international boundaries and, accordingly, will be subject to
the regulatory oversight of the NEB.   The Project will require
various NEB  approvals related to the construction and operation of
the proposed facilities. These authorizations include a Certificate
of Public Convenience and Necessity (““CPCN”)  under section
52 of the National Energy Board Act (“NEB Act”) and approval of
tolls and other tariff and service matters under Part IV of the NEB
Act. The section 52 application will be filed in the first quarter
of 2009. A CPCN    is anticipated by the end of 2009.

Various ancillary authorizations from local, municipal and provincial
authorities for activities incidental to the construction and operation
of the Project facilities will also be required. Filing for these
authorizations will begin in the first quarter of 2009.  In preparation
for filing the section 52 and ancillary applications, the Canadian
Keystone entity has commenced various project activities. These
activities include extensive landowner and public consultation,
engineering and environmental fieldwork, supply and market assessments,
and the acquisition of required land rights. A preliminary information
package (“PIP”) for the Project was filed with the NEB   on July
18, 2008.  The PIP is not a required regulatory filing but rather a
project description designed to allow the NEB  and other government
agencies with environmental assessment and

11

regulatory responsibilities to understand the project, identify
their potential roles in the approval process, and initiate and
facilitate early coordination and scoping of environmental assessment
requirements. The PIP also provides the project information needed to
enable the Crown to commence consultation with potentially affected
Aboriginal Peoples.

It is not the practice of the NEB or other Canadian officials or
agencies to state their views regarding potential facilities in advance
of issuance of their formal decisions on such applications. There
are no agreements or formal understandings regarding these matters
at this time.

VIII. OTHER US APPROVALS

Table 7 of the preliminary Environmental Report provides a list of
the federal and state permits, licenses, approvals, and consultation
requirements applicable to the Project in the United States.  Road
crossing and road use permits are not included in the table because
such permits will be a standard requirement in virtually all counties
crossed by the Project. The instant application is being filed to
request the required Presidential Permit from the Department of State.
With respect to the other permits and approvals listed in the table,
Keystone has begun agency consultation and plans to file all necessary
applications in a timely manner so that it can receive all necessary
authorizations prior to the anticipated start of construction in the
third quarter of 2010.  A summary of agency consultation is included
in the attached Environmental Report.

12

IX. HISTORIC PRESERVATION In compliance with federal laws enacted to
protect cultural resources  from damage resulting from federally funded
or permitted activities, including the National Historic Preservation
Act, cultural resource investigations are being conducted for each
state crossed by the proposed Project. These investigations are being
conducted in consultation with the State Historic Preservation Officers
(“SHPOs”) for each state.  A discussion of these investigations
is set forth at Section 1.10 of the preliminary Environmental
Report. Cultural resources field inventories have been conducted in
2008 and will continue into 2009, pursuant to SHPO-approved plans,
to determine whether there are properties in the project area that
are eligible or potentially eligible for inclusion in the National
Register of Historic Places (“NRHP”).  Upon completion of field
surveys, lists of NRHP-eligible or potentially eligible properties
will be submitted to the lead NEPA agency.

Keystone has engaged with a number of Native American tribes in the
Project area in order to gain an understanding of the tribes’
concerns with respect to the proposed pipeline Project. Keystone
recognizes the unique history, status, and rights of Native American
tribes and believes that the early establishment of relationships with
them is a positive step towards finding mutually beneficial solutions
to concerns raised.  As part of its tribal engagement, Keystone has
invited interested tribes to participate in cultural resource survey
activity. As of this date, Keystone is pursuing discussions with
tribes regarding the logistics of their participation. Keystone has
been careful to make clear to all tribes that it is not undertaking
the government-to-government consultation that is the prerogative
and responsibility of the appropriate federal agencies.

13

X. ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTICE

To facilitate the Department of State’s obligations under Executive
Order 12898, environmental justice considerations, including
information on minority and low-income populations likely to be
affected by construction of the proposed Project, will be addressed
in the supplemental Environmental Report to be submitted on November
19, 2008.

XI. COMPATIBILITY WITH NEC RECOMMENDATIONS

With respect to the recommendations contained in the August 8, 1994
National Economic Council White Paper, “Staff Recommendations on
the Task Force on Border Infrastructure and Facilitation for Improved
US Border Operations,” Keystone states as follows:

* No specific support infrastructure or access roads are necessary
or required by state or regional plans with respect to the border
crossing facilities.

* No Canadian development plans or priorities have been identified as
specifically applicable to the border crossing facilities. Keystone
will comply with all permitting and other requirements applicable to
the Canadian segment of the Project, to the border.

* Keystone will inspect the border crossing facilities in accordance
with US Department of Transportation regulatory requirements set
forth at 49 C.F.R. Parts 194 and 195, including aerial, foot and
in-line mechanical inspections. The cost of these inspections will be
covered by Keystone’s normal operating budget. Keystone operational
personnel will carry out all required inspections.

XII. ENVIRONMENTAL REVIEW

Issuance of the requested Presidential Permit will be a “major
federal action” under NEPA. Accordingly, Keystone is submitting
with its application a preliminary

14

Environmental Report, which is intended to provide the Department
of State with sufficient environmental information to appreciate
the nature and scope of the proposed Project and its potential
environmental impacts. This information is intended to permit the State
Department and other affected agencies to determine the lead federal
agency to undertake the lead role in the NEPA  review process. Keystone
has conducted, and continues to conduct, extensive environmental and
cultural field surveys in 2008 and will supplement the preliminary
Environmental  Report with more complete environmental and cultural
studies, data, and analyses in the supplemental Environmental Reports
to be submitted on November 19, 2008 and in June 2009.

Following submittal of the supplemental Environmental Report in
November 2008, Keystone will continue environmental and cultural
field surveys to further define features that will be affected by the
Project and to evaluate areas affected by potential changes to the
Project to avoid environmental  and cultural resources, residences
and other features. The results of these surveys will be provided in
a further supplemental Environmental Report in June 2009.

Once these supplemental environmental reports are submitted, Keystone
will have provided all required environmental information, including:

i. Description of the site of the proposed facility showing the types
of environment that will be affected by construction of the proposed
facility and related facilities.

ii. The probable impact of construction and operation of the proposed
facilities on these environments, including positive and negative
aspects of primary (construction and operation) and secondary (related
to long-term growth stimulated by the facility) impacts.

iii. Ways in which adverse impacts might be mitigated through
construction techniques, site planning, and safety features, etc.

15

Any probable adverse impacts that cannot be avoided.  Brief discussion
of any trade offs between short-term environmental impacts and
long-term environmental gains or vice versa.

vi. Relationship of the proposed facility to other land use plans,
policies, and controls in the affected area.

vii. Description of the extent to which the construction of the
proposed facility irreversibly curtails the range of the potential
uses of the environment.

viii. What alternatives to the proposed facility were considered
and what are the relative environmental benefits and costs of the
alternatives considered.

XI.  CONCLUSION

For the reasons set forth herein, Keystone submits that the
construction, operation, and maintenance of the proposed border
crossing facilities, in conjunction with the Project, are in
the national interest of the United States. Accordingly, Keystone
respectfully requests that the Department of State issue a Presidential
Permit authorizing the construction, operation, and maintenance of the
identified border crossing facilities for the importation of crude oil,
to be located at the international border between the United States and
Canada, at Phillips County, Montana, as more fully described herein.

Respectfully submitted,

Kristine L. Delkus

Deputy General Counsel

Pipelines and Regulatory Affairs

TransCanada Corporation

450 1 Street, S.W.

Calgary Alberta, Canada

T2P 5H1



James P. White

Associate General Counsel

Pipelines and Regulatory Affairs

16

TransCanada Corporation

4547 Rincon Place

Montclair, VA 22025



Dated: September 19, 2008
