1.2 P urpos e and Need for the P roject The purpose of the Project is
to transport crude oil production from the Western Canadian Sedimentary
Basin (WCSB) to meet growing demand by refineries and markets in
the US. The Project will transport crude oil from the oil supply hub
near Hardisty, Alberta, Canada and deliver it to existing oil storage
terminal facilities near Nederland and Houston, Texas. Construction
of the Project will provide US refineries and markets with access
to a substantial and reliable supply of Canadian crude oil to meet
increasing US demand for petroleum products.

The need for the Project is dictated by a number of factors including:

• Increasing crude oil demand in the United States;

• Decreasing domestic crude supply in the United States;

• Increasing WCSB crude oil supply;

• An opportunity to reduce US dependence on foreign offshore oil
supply through further supply diversification to stable, secure
Canadian crude supplies; and

• Binding shipper interest in the Project.

1.2.1 Increas ing WC S B C rude Oil S upply

Established crude oil reserves in the WCSB are estimated at 179
billion barrels (Canadian Association of Petroleum Producers (CAPP),
(January, 2008). The primary source of WCSB crude oil supply -- over
97 percent -- is comprised of Canada's vast oil sands reserves located
in northern Alberta. The Alberta Energy and Utilities Board (AEUB)
estimates there are 175 billion barrels of established reserves out
of 315 billion barrels of bitumen ultimately recoverable in Canada's
oil sands. Alberta has the second largest crude oil reserves in the
world, second only to Saudi Arabia.

As a result of growing production from the oil sands, crude oil
supplies from the WCSB are expected to increase by about 1.6 million
barrels per day (bpd) by 2017, from current production of about 2.4
million bpd (CAPP, June, 2008).

1.2.2 Increas ing C rude Oil Demand in the US

According to the Energy Information Administration (EIA), US demand for
petroleum products has increased by over 11 percent or two million
bpd over the past 10 years and is expected to increase further
(EIA, Annual Energy Review, 2007). The EIA estimates that total US
petroleum consumption is projected to increase by approximately 1.0
million bpd over the next 10 years (EIA Annual Energy Outlook 2008),
representing average demand growth of about 100,000 bpd per year.

The Project's key delivery area, PADD III or the US Gulf Coast,
represents the largest and most complex refining district in the US
with 56 refineries comprising approximately 8.4 million bpd of total
refining capacity.

1.2.3 Decreas ing Domes tic C rude Oil S upply

At the same time, domestic US crude supplies continue to decline. For
example, over the past 10 years, domestic crude production in the US
has declined at an average rate of about 135,000 bpd per year or two
percent per year (EIA, Annual Energy Review, 2007).

1.2.4 F urther S upply Divers ification to C anadian C rude Oil

The US historically has compensated for decreases in domestic
production through increased imports from Canada and foreign offshore
sources. Canada is currently the largest supplier of imported crude
oil and

refined products to the United States, supplying over 2.4 million
bpd in 2007 and representing over 11 percent of total US petroleum
product consumption (EIA, Annual Energy Review, 2007).

US imports of foreign crude and refined products continue to
increase as a result of decreasing domestic production and increasing
demand. Crude and refined petroleum product imports into the US have
increased by over 3.3 million bpd over the past 10 years. In 2007,
the US imported over 13.4 million bpd of crude oil and petroleum
products or over 60 percent of total US petroleum product consumption
(EIA, Annual Energy Review, 2007).

The Project would provide an opportunity for US refiners in PADD III
to diversify supply away from traditional offshore foreign crude
supply and to obtain direct access to secure and growing Canadian
crude supplies. Access to incremental Canadian crude supply would
also provide an opportunity for the US to supplement annual declines
in domestic crude production and more significantly, decrease its
dependence on offshore foreign crude supplies, namely from Mexico
and Venezuela, the top two heavy crude oil importers into the US
Gulf Coast.

1.2.5 B inding S hipper Interes t

Shippers -- producers, marketers or refiners, evaluate the merits of
various pipeline proposals and ultimately decide which projects to
support. Shippers have expressed material interest in the Project
and in securing additional crude oil pipeline capacity. Potential
shippers have already committed to long-term binding contracts,
which will enable Keystone to proceed with regulatory applications
and, pending successful regulatory and environmental approvals, with
construction of the pipeline. These long-term binding commitments
demonstrate a material endorsement of support for the Project, its
economics, proposed route, and target market, as well as the need for
incremental pipeline capacity and access to Canadian crude supplies.
