**ES.6.14.2 Greenhouse Gases and Climate Change**

Crude oil delivered to PADD II and PADD III refineries by the Project
are likely to be replacing heavy crude oil from other less reliable
and diminishing sources. Assuming constant demand for refined oil
products, the incremental impact of the Project on GHG emissions would
be minor. Indirect GHG-related emissions during operation would be
associated with electrical generation for the pump stations

(approximately 2.6 to 4.4 million tons of CO2 per year for a proposed
initial capacity of 700,000 bpd and a potential capacity of 900,000
bpd, respectively). In addition, refining the quantity of crude oil
that would be delivered by the Project would produce an estimated
1.3 to 1.7 million tons of CO2 per year.

This assumes that the entire volume of oil transported by the project
would be heavy crude oil. However,

since the crude oil delivered by the Project would be replacing
similar crude oils from other sources, the incremental impact of these
emissions would be minor. Future refinery upgrades and expansions
could potentially increase the annual production of GHG in the PADD
II and PADD III area. Should such upgrades and expansions occur,
generation of GHG could potentially increase. The cumulative impact of
increased GHG emissions in this area would depend upon the potential
for reductions in GHG emissions elsewhere, consistent with developing
regulatory frameworks in the U.S., Canada and worldwide.

The proposed mitigation measures would serve to offset some of the
GHG emissions associated with the

Project. These measures would include revegetation of the construction
work areas, restoration of wetland functions, and compensatory wetland
mitigation for wetland impacts. Minimal direct GHG

emissions would be associated with operation (e.g., vehicle operation
and fugitive emissions), and indirect emissions would be associated
with electrical generation for the pump stations and refineries.

The potential impacts of climate change would not be expected
to affect the proposed Project. An increase in temperatures may
increase wildfires in the Project area. An increased intensity of
storm events, should this occur, may result in additional flooding in
some areas near the Project, particularly in the Gulf Coast Segment
and Houston Lateral should hurricane activity increase as a result
of oceanic temperature conditions. The Project would be designed
and constructed to be consistent with applicable federal, state,
and local standards, and therefore should be resistant to forces
associated with reasonably likely climate conditions during the
lifetime of the pipeline system. Other effects of climate change,
such as air quality degradation, health effects, reduced snow pack,
and agricultural issues, would not likely impact the proposed Project.
