**Greenhouse Gas Emissions**

DOS commissioned a detailed study of greenhouse gas life-cycle
emissions that compared Canadian oil sands crude with other selected
reference crudes. This study was a thorough review of recent scientific
literature on greenhouse gas life-cycle emissions for Canadian oil
sands crude including extraction, upgrading, transportation, refining,
and combustion.

The study's major conclusion was that, throughout its life cycle,
oil sands crude is, on average, more greenhouse gas intensive than the
crude oil it would replace in the U.S. However, the relative greenhouse
gas intensity varies depending on (1) study design factors, such as
the reference crudes selected for comparison with Canadian oil sands
crudes (e.g., 2005 U.S. average crude oil, Venezuelan Bachaquero,
Middle East Sour, and Mexican Heavy) and the timeframe selected, and
(2) study assumptions, such as the extraction method and the mix of
crudes that would be transported by the pipeline.

For example, the Department of Energy's National Environmental
Technology Lab (NETL) study indicated that the life-cycle greenhouse
gas emissions of gasoline produced from Canadian oil sands crude are
approximately 17 percent higher than gasoline from the 2005 average
mix of crude oil consumed in the U.S. The NETL study serves as a key
input for analyses conducted by EPA and DOE. In comparison, a study
conducted by TIAX, LLC, found that the greenhouse gas emissions from
gasoline produced from Canadian oil sands crude are only 2 percent
higher when compared to gasoline from Venezuelan heavy crude, a type of
crude oil that is similar to the crude oil that would be transported
by the proposed Project and is currently refined in large quantities
by Gulf Coast refineries.

The proposed Project is not likely to impact the amount of crude
oil produced from the oil sands. However, for illustrative purposes,
the DOS- commissioned study estimated that incremental life- cycle
U.S. greenhouse gas emissions from displacing reference crude oils with
Canadian oil sands crude oils imported through the proposed Project
would be between 3 and 21 million metric tons of carbon dioxide
emissions annually. This range is equivalent to annual greenhouse
gas emissions from the combustion of fuels in 588,000 to 4,061,000
passenger vehicles.

In addition, current projections suggest that the amount of energy
required to extract all crude oils is projected to increase over
time due to the need to extract oil from ever deeper reservoirs using
more energy intensive techniques. However, while the greenhouse gas
intensity of reference crude oils may trend upward, the projections
for the greenhouse gas intensity of Canadian oil sands crude oils
suggests that they may stay relatively constant. Although there is
some uncertainty in the trends for both reference crude oils and
oil sands derived crude oils, on balance it appears that the gap in
greenhouse gas intensity may decrease over time.
