TOXIC TAR SANDS: PROFILES FROM THE FRONT LINES

Explore, enjoy and protect the planet

M ost AMericAns have never heard of the Alberta tar sands, yet it
is one of the largest and most destructive projects on Earth. This
little-known industrial mega-project is creating an ongoing
environmental disaster in Canada, and is now threatening to create
one here in the United States.

Tar sands oil is mined from a black sticky substance called bitumen,
found beneath the vast boreal forest in Alberta, Canada. To extract
tar sands crude, oil companies clear-cut ancient forest, then strip
mine the soil beneath it, using huge quantities of fresh water and
natural gas to separate the oil from bitumen. The process leaves behind
giant toxic lakes that are linked to abnormally high rates of cancer
in neighboring communities and are large enough to be seen from space.

But it doesn't stop there. The oil industry is expanding facilities
to process this toxic oil here in the United States through a network
of refineries and pipelines. Public health in several states is under
threat from dramatic increases in refining pollution, and massive
pipelines are planned to cross the United States' largest freshwater
aquifer, which supplies one-third of our nation's agriculture.

Tar SandS Oil

Tar SandS Oil POiSOnS Our air Processing tar sands oil releases
pollutants directly linked to asthma, emphysema and birth defects into
American communities. Because tar sands oil is a heavy, low-quality
form of crude, it requires extensive "upgrading" to be transformed
into fuel. Refining tar sands crude creates far more air pollution in

American communities that are already burdened with cancer and poor air
quality as a result of oil industry activities. Tar sands oil contains,
among other toxic metals, 11 times more sulfur and nickel, six times
more nitrogen, and five times more lead than conventional crude oil.1

Heavy metals and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons released in tar
sands refining have been linked to pre-natal brain damage.

Nitrogen oxides, along with volatile organic compounds released in
tar sands refining are the principal causes of smog and ground-

level ozone. Exposure to nitrogen oxides is a direct cause of asthma,
emphysema and other lung diseases.

With plans to triple refining and transportation of tar sands by

2015, there is no question that air pollution and health problems in
communities from the Great Lakes to the Gulf Coast will

Tar SandS Oil COnTaminaTeS Our Clean WaTer Tar sands production
wastes and contaminates tremendous amounts of water. Every barrel
of oil produced requires four barrels of water. In this process,
water is pumped into toxic waste reservoirs large enough to be seen
from space. The mercury, lead and arsenic in tar sands waste threaten
human health, even at small levels of exposure. Already, communities
downstream from tar sands mines in Canada report 30 percent more
incidents of rare bile duct cancer than those who do not live near
the tar sands.2

Expanded reliance on this dirty oil would put important

American water sources at risk. Canadian pipeline companies currently
operate 1,900 miles of oil pipelines in and around the

Great Lakes watershed, which supplies 25 million people with drinking
water.

Tar sands oil contains elevated levels of many known carcinogens
and toxins. In a recent study, tar sands wastewater "tailings" from
extracting oil were found to contain ammonia, benzene, cyanide,

phenols, toluene, polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, arsenic,

copper, sulphate, and chloride.3 Many of these chemicals are highly
toxic and known to cause cancer, and regularly leach into groundwater
from the massive lakes used to store tailings.4 These chemicals are
present in tar sands oil before and after processing,

and will end up in American groundwater when pipelines leak.

Communities in Alberta have long been speaking out about the damage
tar sands poses to their health through water and air pollution. Now,
Americans from Minnesota to Houston are worried about Canada's tar
sands expansion poisoning their water, destroying their farmland,
and contaminating their air.

Here, we profile thirteen people from across North America whose health
and livelihoods are at risk as a result of toxic tar sands expansion.

Toxic Tar SandS Oil

PHoTo: DAvID DoDGE, PEMBINA INsTITuTE

"My people Are dying," says George Poitras, a member of the Mikisew
Cree First Nation in Fort

Chipewyan, Alberta. His community, situated just downstream from the
vast toxic moonscape of tar sands development in Alberta, has absorbed
some of the worst damage from the project.

"The extraction of oil from Canada's tar sands is having a devastating
impact on our indigenous people," Poitras says.

Studies have found levels of mercury, arsenic, lead, and other toxins
at elevated levels near the area's tar sands excavation sites.5
These chemicals are known carcinogens and cause the types of rare
cancers---including cancer of the bile ducts---that are on the rise
among members of the Fort Chipewyan community.

Statistically, bile duct cancer normally occurs in one out of every
100,000 people. But a study by the Alberta Cancer Board confirmed these
cancer rates at Fort Chipewyan are 30 percent higher than average.6

Poitras has been on a mission to raise awareness about the harmful
effects of tar sands development on his community's health---ever
since 2006, when Fort Chipewyan's general physician, Dr. John O'Connor,
went public in the press about the unusual cancers among the patients
he served.

For the past four years, Poitras has been spreading the word about the
risks of tar sands oil at colleges and universities, public forums,
and even at oil companies' annual meetings. He and other indigenous
activists have collaborated on documentary films about the tar sands
that have been shown in film festivals around the world.

"The damage from the tar sands isn't restricted to Fort Chipewyan
or even to Alberta," he says. There are pipelines that leak oil,
and tar sands refining is a huge contributor to global greenhouse
emissions. We call the tar sands 'bloody oil.'"

Tar SandS are deSTruCTive aT every STage Of Their lifeCyCle,
from the ravaged boreal forests of Northern Canada to the choked
communities in refining corridors across America. But the indigenous
communities living closest to the land bear special witness to its
destruction. Tribes have spoken out on the toll tar sands have taken
on their ancestral lands and the water and wildlife that supports
their culture and community. These are the stories of prominent tribal
activists and their struggle against the devastating tar sands.

THE HEART OF THE TAR SANDS: 

A BligHt on nAtiVe coMMUnities

My people are dying.

our greatest concern george poitras Mikisew Cree First Nation, Fort
Chipewyan, Alberta

elizABetH sHerMAn has been fighting contamination from tar sands
oil pipelines for years. Known in her community by her Ojibwe name,
"Blue Sky Woman," Sherman is a member of the Leech Lake Band of Ojibwe
in Minnesota.

The Leech Lake Ojibwe have always lived on the piney marshes of their
ancestral lands. It is no surprise they value water deeply on their
reservation in the land of "ten thousand lakes."

"Between our lakes and our wetlands, the Leech Lake Reservation is
70 percent water. Our greatest concern is our water," says Sherman.

Enbridge Inc., the largest tar sands pipeline operator in Canada
(and the company behind the massive Kalamazoo pipeline spill in
Michigan in 2010), pumps its toxic products south directly through
Leech Lake lands.

Over the last several years, oil spills from pipelines owned or
operated by Enbridge have leaked multiple times, spilling toxic crude
from Alberta's tar sands and threatening the community's water.

Some of Enbridge's pipes have been in the ground for 60 years, and
tribal members tell of corroded pipes protruding from the ground,
cracked and seeping oil. In 2010, three spills occurred in four
months within a 35-mile radius of the tribal boundaries, all from
pipelines owned by Enbridge. One of the spills was not detected until
the oil-coated marsh accidentally caught on fire; tribal members had
to alert the company. It remains unclear how much oil leaked into
the surrounding water.

Sherman says these are just the most recent events in an ongoing
environmental tragedy for her community.

Traditional areas for gathering sage on the reservation have been
destroyed by pipelines. For centuries, the Ojibwe have relied on these
sacred medicinal plants, but pipelines buried directly in critical
wetlands have all but eliminated them from the local ecosystem. Testing
by the tribal resource management division revealed contaminants
in wells on the reservation, and confirmed a large crude oil plume
stretching towards homes in the community.

The two major aquifers in Leech Lake are part of a watershed that
feeds the headwaters of the Mississippi River.

"This isn't just a Leech Lake issue," Sherman explains. "We are
holders of the headwaters of the Mississippi. If our Mississippi River
headwaters are polluted by tar sands, everything in the river's path
down to the Gulf of Mexico will be contaminated."

Sherman is now leading a legal battle against the Enbridge pipeline
running through the Leech Lake Reservation. She and three other
plaintiffs have asked for a temporary restraining order to stop
construction of a new tar sands pipeline through their land. Despite
the plans for new construction, there is still no remediation plan
for the existing spills that have polluted the tribe's water. Their
lawsuit remains in appeals status.

Meanwhile, Sherman says, "The oil is still there, the water is still
contaminated, and the damage is still done."

our greatest concern is our water.

elizabeth sherman Leech Lake Band of Ojibwe, Minnesota

Kent MoecKly farms wheat and corn in the prairie grasslands of
South Dakota.

Moeckly and his neighbors rely on a rural water system that draws from
the James Aquifer, sourced just north of his farm. This aquifer lies
in sandy, permeable soil. But now a massive tar sands pipeline runs
right through Moeckly's farm and the aquifer, putting his community's
only source of water at risk.

This oil artery, known as the Keystone I, is TransCanada's main tar
sands oil pipeline into the United States. It provides a taste of
what would come if TransCanada is allowed to more than double its
toxic capacity with the Keystone XL pipeline.8

Moeckly says pipeline consultants didn't even survey his land before
they reported it as "low consequence" status, which allowed

TransCanada to build the Keystone I through the aquifer in 2009,
using thinner pipe and higher pressure than in The Wake Of The BP Oil
diSaSTer in The gulf, many people are thinking more about where we get
our oil, and at what cost. A vast network of oil pipelines crisscrosses
our country, posing a largely overlooked threat, especially in the
rural areas of America's breadbasket. Many pipelines are already
poisoning water and land throughout the country, with over 2,500
spills from pipelines occurring in the last decade alone.7

The proposed Keystone XL pipeline would make the situation much
worse. The pipeline would carry toxic tar sands oil across nearly 2,000
miles of American farmland from Montana to the Gulf Coast. These are
the stories of American farmers, ranchers, and landowners that live
with the toxic threat of pipeline spills and tar sands contamination,
present and future.

any other pipeline before it. When farmers in the area requested
thicker pipe to reduce the risk of water contamination, their concerns
went unheeded. "TransCanada absolutely ignored us. They plowed on
through,"

Moeckly says. Moeckly never wanted the pipeline to come through his
land. Despite aggressive pressure from the company, he resisted signing
TransCanada's initial offers. But in South Dakota, "eminent domain"
laws do little to protect landowners from large corporations. A foreign
company like TransCanada can seize private property if negotiations
fall through.

Faced with the prospect of losing his land, Moeckly felt he had no
choice. He finally agreed to allow the pipeline in, and accept the
threats from tar sands oil.

Moeckly says companies like TransCanada turn neighbor against neighbor
in their effort to get their projects built. "They will tell you that
you are the "last one on the block" and "holding things up,"" he says.

Kent Moeckly Britton, South Dakota

My family will be living with this for generations.

poison pipelines in AMericA's HeArtlAnd

Moeckly fears the long-term impacts of the pipeline on his land and
crops, but knows it is too early to tell what the full extent of the
damage may be. The only evidence he has of the buried pipe is the mess
construction crews left behind. Debris and soil mounds still litter
his land, leaving large standing pools throughout his fields. He
estimates about fifteen acres of his property are now useless.

"It's dead land now," he says. "It's a lake." But it's the future
threat of pipeline spills and water contamination that worries
him most. "My family will be living with this for generations,"
he says. "The threat will never disappear."

Ben gotscHAll feels a deep, physical sense of connection to his
family's ranch near Atkinson, Nebraska. He became involved in the
fight to save the place he loves in April, when he heard of public
hearings for a tar sands pipeline coming through Atkinson. When he
went to the hearing, he saw the pipeline would cross Holt Creek just
a few miles from where it flows through the middle of the Gotschall
ranch, and lie directly in the sensitive sand hills and the precious
Ogallala Aquifer. Now his greatest fear is that his family's creek
and the Ogallala aquifer that supplies Nebraska with nearly all of its
water will be threatened from toxic pipeline leaks like the Kalamazoo
River oil spill in July.

His is the fourth generation to work and live on his family's
land. Today, the Gotschalls raise organic, grass-fed beef and dairy
cows on their ranch nestled along the banks of Holt Creek in the scenic

Sand Hills of Nebraska. The 30-year-old rancher has become an outspoken
opponent of the Keystone XL pipeline. Gotschall is motivated by his
strong sense of place. He loves Nebraska and the rolling hills where
he grew up.

Because his family does not own land directly on the Keystone XL
route, they have no legal recourse to protect their fragile aquifer
and creek from the pipeline's permanent threat.

Gotschall knows organic farmers must pay particular attention to
soil and water quality, and Nebraska's crystal aquifers and unspoiled
grassland are vital to his way of life.

"This pipeline goes against the whole foundation of organic farming,"
he explains. "All we have out there is grass and water. That's how
we make our living."

What most upsets Gotschall is that farming livelihoods in Nebraska
are being threatened just so a foreign oil company can make more
money. Instead of building more pipelines, Gotschall would like to
see Nebraska's wind energy harnessed. Nebraska has the sixth highest
wind energy potential in the country, and presents a significant
opportunity for good Nebraska jobs.9

"We need to do things that put money in Nebraskan pockets, not foreign
corporate pockets," he says.

Ben gotschall Atkinson, Nebraska this pipeline goes against the whole
foundation of organic farming.

HArry Bennett will tell you he is no hydrologist, but he knows what's
at stake when it comes to water quality in his Kansas town. A 32-year
resident of Marion County in Kansas, Bennett is a grain marketer for
the Organic Grain Producers Association, representing hundreds of
farmers in several states. He is also the owner of a small family
farm crisscrossed by the Spring Branch Creek and riparian wetlands
bordered by TransCanada's Keystone Cushing extension, which will soon
funnel dirty tar sands crude to Oklahoma.

Bennett farms his land organically, raises black walnut trees,
and diligently maintains the riparian wetlands along his section of
creek. He believes the preservation of this wetland habitat protects
his farm from powerful creek floods, and helps purify the groundwater
his family and farm survive on. They draw all water for household use,
livestock, and crop irrigation from two wells on their property. The
wells are their only source of fresh water.

But now Bennett is worried about his family's water. TransCanada's
pipeline directly threatens his wells and wetlands with contamination
from tar sands crude.

This summer, Bennett regularly walked to the 20-foot hole where huge
bulldozers bored a deep passage for the pipeline under the railroad
that forms his western property boundary. Over a period of many weeks,
he observed a crew pumping out what he thought was rainwater from
the construction pits, but his visits to the site revealed the holes
would refill every evening with the same clear blue water that fills
his wells.

Bennett now believes the pipeline lies directly in the groundwater
he relies on for his farm.

But because the pipeline does not physically cross his land, Mr.

Bennett had no say in its construction. When Spring Branch Creek
flooded in June, it washed out a construction bridge, gouged deep
erosion in the banks, and sent pipeline construction debris washing
up into the woods on his property.

"They do it the cheapest way they can with very little thought to
ramifications downstream," Bennett says.

The Enbridge Michigan spill in July gushed one million gallons of
toxic crude into the Kalamazoo River before any leak was detected,
and Bennett knows he now faces similar threats from the Keystone
pipeline. The pipeline is in direct contact with the water table
his family and his community rely on. Any leak or rupture of the
pipeline would immediately contaminate their only clean water source.

"This pipeline is a ticking time bomb," Bennett says. "A leak would
take seconds to poison the land I've lived off for thirty-two years."

two yeArs Ago, David Daniel was surprised to hear from his neighbor
of survey crews trespassing on his property near the east Texas town
of Winnsboro. TransCanada was beginning work for the Keystone XL tar
sands pipeline, slated to run the length of Daniel's land, cutting
it in half. Daniel wasn't told about the pipeline before the survey
crews showed up, but laws in Texas do little to protect landowners
from corporations like TransCanada.

Now, Daniel is worried about the pipeline destroying wetland habitat
and threatening springs and creeks. He's spoken with water experts
who say the construction of the pipeline could forever damage the
natural water supply in the area.

Daniel bought his land specifically for its lush resources with the
intention of preserving it; 20 acres of 100-year-old trees, wetlands,
wildlife and spring-fed creeks were to be his family's sanctuary.

Harry Bennett Marion County, Kansas

A leak would take seconds to poison the land i've lived off for thirty-
two years.PH

"Our intention was to preserve our land as a legacy for our daughter,"
he says. "We never dreamed that we would live to see any part of it
destroyed, especially by a foreign oil company."

Soon after the surveyors came through, Daniel received several
intimidating letters from TransCanada. Then, land agents were sent
to his home, pressuring him to sign contracts he was not given time
to read. Fearing he would lose his land completely, Daniel eventually
signed an easement agreement.

But he hasn't given up. Now, Daniel is stepping up his fight to
protect property owners from being forced to endure the unacceptably
high risks tar sands pipelines pose to their land. Two thousand five
hundred and fifty-four pipeline spills occurred between the years
2000-2009 alone, and Daniel knows a pipeline leak is not a question of
"if," but "when."14 He is organizing with farmers and landowners from
Nebraska to Texas to inform others about the risks toxic pipelines
pose, and the threat his family is now forced to live with.

"My family will be forced to live in fear and physical danger of
this pipeline with some of the most toxic stuff we've ever seen come
through this state. This is our home and was supposed to be a safe
place to raise our daughter, and now it's at risk for an oil disaster."

david daniel Winnsboro, Texas this is our home and was supposed to
be a safe place to raise our daughter,

Keystone Xl pipeline The Keystone XL is the latest planned expansion
in TransCanada's web of toxic oil pipelines, designed to increase
our dependence on the world's dirtiest oil for decades to come.

• 
 1,980 Miles of pipeline spanning the width of the US.10

•   Will cross six states, from Montana to Texas

• 
 A barrel of tar sands oil produces up to 3 times as 
much global warming pollution as conventional oil.11

• 
 Tar sands oil from the Keystone XL pipeline will create 
pollution equivalent to adding roughly 6.5 million 
passenger vehicles to the road, or constructing 
12 new coal-fired power plants.12

• 
 If we increase automobile fuel efficiency by just 2.5 
mpg from current standards, we will save more oil 
than the Keystone XL pipeline can provide.13

and now it's at risk for an oil disaster.

Kalamazoo River oil spill Photo: Lucas Evans for sierra Club Michigan

dr. dolores leonArd, a retired professor, lives a few blocks from
Marathon Oil Company's refinery in southeast

Detroit in the same house she's called home for fifty-three
years. Leonard has been fighting for environmental justice in her
community since 2003. She's earned a reputation as a formidable
opponent to polluters.

There are dozens of polluting industries in Leonard's zip code,
and she works hard to rein in toxic emissions and protect public
health in her neighborhood. But no issue has taken up more of her
time and energy than Marathon's new refining expansion--a $2.2 billion
"upgrade" to its facilities to increase the volume of tar sands coming
into Leonard's community.

Despite opposition from neighbors, the Marathon refinery's this tar
sands refinery brings illness for miles around...life as we have
known it will never be the same.

dr. dolores leonard Detroit, Michigan pollution is ballooning as more
tar sands are processed in the expanded facility.

Leonard is not surprised that her neighborhood has been targeted
for processing the dirtiest form of oil in the world. Experience
has taught her that the worst pollution usually finds its way to the
poorest communities. "When you look at where detrimental polluting
facilities are located," Leonard says, "it's always in communities
where there are poor people and people of color."

Leonard was determined to arm her neighbors in their fight to protect
air and health from the growing tar sands threat. Twice she helped
bring in a toxicologist from the Michigan Department of Community
Health to talk with residents of her community about illnesses related
to living in the vicinity of oil refining, and

many COmmuniTieS SlaTed fOr Tar SandS refining already suffer the
disproportionate brunt of industrial pollution and health problems
associated with chemical and petroleum refining. since refineries
and heavy industry are often located in low-income communities,
these citizens have the fewest resources available to defend their
communities against polluters. They pay the high health costs that
come as a direct result from exposure to industrial contaminants.

In communities around the Great Lakes, tar sands oil is sent to
refineries fed by Enbridge's massive Lakehead Pipeline network,
which is 1,900 miles long and among

TAR SANDS REFINERIES:

pollUting AMericA's Air

DeTroIT'S 48217 zIp coDe has the dubious distinction of being
the most polluted in Michigan---and neighboring zip codes in southwest
Detroit account for five of the ten most polluted areas statewide.16

More than 85 percent of 48217 residents are African American, and the
median household income is about half the national average. sadly,
but perhaps not surprisingly, polluting industries choose to victimize
the communities with the fewest resources to resist. At latest count,
southwest .

Detroit has 27 high-polluting facilities.

Now, Marathon oil is expanding its massive Detroit refinery to process
more tar sands crude oil from Alberta. The heavy tar sands crude,
which contains many impurities, takes far more energy to refine than
conventional crude oil, and releases more toxins, heavy metals, and
carbon dioxide in the process. The toll tar sands refining will take
on this community is compounded by the blight of an industry already
poisoning its people.

COMMuNITy AT RISk: **RefineRies and Michigan's Most polluted
neighboRhood**

Deformed fish caught in polluted river near tar sands mine. Photo:
George Poitras to explain how residents can file a Toxic Release
Inventory with the EPA.

More times than she can remember, Leonard has appeared before the
Detroit City Council to protest the devastating impacts of tar
sands---not only on southwest Detroit, but wherever pipelines carry
tar sands crude oil.

Leonard has set up public hearings with the Michigan Department of
Community Health to help inform her neighbors about the threats of
processing tar sands oil.

"There are so many health and quality-of-life problems resulting from
all the heavy industry--and now tar sands--in the neighborhood, and
you live with it every day," Leonard says. "This tar sands refinery
brings illness for miles around, along with stress for residents who
are watching it being built. They know that along with the structure
comes the knowledge that life as we have known it will never be the
same. It gives one the feeling of being trapped and helpless."

TAR SANDS REFINERIES:

pollUting AMericA's Air the largest in the world.15 over the summer of
2010, an Enbridge pipeline burst, spilling over one million gallons of
crude into a major river that flows into Lake Michigan. But a greater,
ongoing environmental disaster takes place every day in the refining
communities fed by Enbridge's pipelines, where air pollution damages
residents' health.

If Canada's tar sands industry is allowed to move forward with plans
for massive expansion of pipelines and refineries, the situations in
these communities will worsen.

Americans living near some of the largest Midwest refineries, such as
the BP Whiting refinery outside Chicago and the Marathon refinery in
southwest Detroit, are already suffering from health conditions like
asthma, and face greater air pollution as these refineries expand
to process more tar sands crude. In south Dakota, residents are
fighting the Hyperion refinery, which would process tar sands oil in
the heart of the state's richest farmland. others, living in Houston,
fear escalated air pollution if the Keystone XL pipeline is built.

tHeresA lAndrUM still lives on the same block where she was born
in southwest Detroit, surrounded by an industrial hub of polluting
industries, with smokestacks and chemical tanks just a chain-link
fence away from backyards and parks. Many of the Midwest's largest
petrochemical refiners, including the massive Marathon refinery,
are Landrum's not-so-friendly neighbors. Landrum believes the
refineries are responsible for the cancer and illness in her family
and neighborhood, and the problem will become worse as the Marathon
refinery expands to process more tar sands crude, which contains
more pollutants.

A trained journalist, Landrum stopped working full-time in the early
1990s to help her mother when she was diagnosed with cancer.

"My mom had four different cancers," Landrum says. "First she had
cancer of the throat, then the face. In 1986 she was diagnosed with
lung cancer but survived. Then she developed cancer of the other lung
and died in 1996."

Landrum's father--a one-time Marathon Oil employee--also died of
cancer. Landrum is convinced that the toxic environment of her
neighborhood contributed to their illnesses and subsequent deaths.

"Ten people on my block have died of cancer in the last decade,"
Landrum explains. "We have a lot of pneumonia, too---one of my brothers
died of it---and lots of asthma. All the little kids in the house
across the street have asthma, and their father just died of cancer."

Landrum was horrified when Marathon announced plans to build a $2.2
billion expansion to process tar sands crude--the world's dirtiest oil.

"When we found out Marathon was bringing in nasty tar sands from
Canada, my first reaction was 'Lord have mercy. Where can we go?'"

She started researching what kinds of chemicals would be emitted by
the new tar sands facility and the effects they can have on human
health. "We found terrible things. Carcinogens, carbon monoxide,
benzene and toluene, which harm the nervous system, methyl ethyl
ketone, which can cause blindness. A lot of really bad stuff."

Landrum began attending community meetings and block meetings, and
talking to anybody who would listen about the increased pollution
coming from tar sands refining.

In 2007, Landrum herself was diagnosed with cancer. While undergoing
chemotherapy and radiation, she continued to attend Detroit City
Council meetings to protest the tar sands expansion of the Marathon
refinery. That fight was lost.

Landrum's cancer is now in remission, although a recent chest x-ray
showed severe damage to her lungs, and she is undergoing tests
to determine the cause of an enlarged thyroid and a goiter in her
neck. Undaunted, she continues to fight to stop tar sands oil from
further poisoning her home.

Landrum says the toxic tar sands expansion has left many of her
neighbors ready to give up. Pushed beyond their limits by ever
increasing tar sands pollution, some are considering suing the city
and Marathon for money to relocate away from their ravaged environment.

"Sometimes," Landrum says, "it seems like these companies put dollars
above human life."

JAcKie sMitH has lived in Detroit since 1967, watching her neighborhood
slowly deteriorate under the shadow of the Marathon Oil Refinery,
which is now preparing to process additional tar sands crude.

The sharp winds of the Midwest blow Marathon's toxic fumes right
over Smith's home---fumes she believes have caused her family's
health problems.

"My middle son had nose bleeds when he was a child. The doctor said
it was from benzene," she says. Benzene is a potent human carcinogen.

"My husband has asthma and emphysema, hypertension, and sleep
apnea. My sinuses were purple like I'd smoked all my life and I've
never smoked. You should hear my voice in the morning. I'm theresa
landrum Detroit, Michigan

when we found out Marathon was bringing in nasty tar sands from canada,
my first reaction was 'lord have mercy.

where can we go?'

gagging. This has been going on for over 10 years." Smith's husband,
Robert, is frustrated with public hearings where officials seem to
turn a deaf ear to community complaints of pollution and poor air
quality. But she is more optimistic. Expert air quality monitors
were recently called in to assess the neighborhood's air after Smith
and her neighbors called attention to poor monitoring practices in
her area. The independent tests showed major discrepancies with the
state's results, indicating toxins in her community were even higher
than reported.

"[Marathon's] refinery is too near to local schools," Smith says. "When
you go into someone's house and smell the chemicals, why would you
want to stay here?"

Children in Smith's neighborhood will be exposed to increased levels
of airborne toxins from Marathon's tar sands expansion, further
exacerbating respiratory and other illnesses already prevalent among
children in her neighborhood.

"Tar sands oil is more toxic than regular oil, so what kinds of effects
will that have on children already suffering from asthma?" Smith
wonders. "They're killing a community."

cArolyn MArsH's house in Whiting, Indiana, just southeast of Chicago,
sits within walking distance of both Lake

Michigan and the BP Whiting Refinery. One is beautiful and the other,
Marsh says, looks like "a death trap zone." Now BP is pushing to
expand the capacity of its refinery to process tar sands crude.

The synthetic heavy crude produced from tar sands is laden with
more toxins than conventional oil. If the expansion goes through,
people like Marsh, who live in the shadow of these refineries, will
face increased exposure to heavy metals, sulfur, and carcinogens
like benzene.

After learning of BP's plans to pump tar sands pollution into the
air and her community, Marsh was galvanized to action. She joined a
legal challenge to the oil giant's air permit.

Marsh believes BP's permit application dramatically underestimates the
potential air pollution from their tar sands expansion. The company
understated the amount of toxic gases vented from flares,

they're killing a community.

Jackie smith Detroit, Michigan carolyn Marsh Whiting, Indiana claiming
they would only be released occasionally. But flaring will only
increase as the refinery handles more of the world's dirtiest oil.17

Flaring is only one part of the refinery's massive polluting process,
and air pollution is not the only threat that Marsh fears from the
tar sands expansion.

Lake Michigan, which provides drinking water for 10 million people,
will be exposed to new levels of contamination from particulate
emissions and huge increases in ammonia and other discharges into
the water from the refinery's tar sands expansion.18,19 The refinery
is already one of the largest sources of mercury pollution in Lake
Michigan.20 Mercury is a potent neurotoxin that causes severe fetal
damage, impaired motor function, and kidney and respiratory damage
in humans.21

Tar sands crude spells disaster for clean water in every step of its
life cycle. If tar sands operations continue to expand in America,
Lake Michigan will be exposed to the same types of contamination
spreading through the once pristine water sources along the Athabasca
River in Alberta, where tar sands are mined.

A recent study published by leading Canadian scientists found elevated
concentrations of toxic heavy metals including arsenic, lead and
mercury around and downstream from tar sands mining operations,
suggesting a strong correlation between tar sands mining and toxic
discharges to water resources.22 These poisonous impurities are
released in refining as well, and discharges from BP's tar sands
expansion will bring the pollution of the Athabasca directly to
Lake Michigan.

Marsh believes the citizen struggle to stop the tar sands expansion
is her community's best line of defense, and she has committed to the
fight. She has little faith in state regulators, whom she believes are
too complicit with toxic conditions created by BP's refinery. Marsh
knows what's at stake.

"We don't want Lake Michigan to become another oil industry sacrifice
zone. Quality of life here in Indiana should not suffer for foreign
oil profits," she says.

Quality of life here in indiana should not suffer for foreign oil
profits.

wHen JUAn pArrAs moved to Eastwood, a neighborhood along the Houston
Ship Channel, one of the first things he noticed was the proximity
of local schools to the vast array of refineries and power plants
that line the ship channel. Many of the refineries process tar sands
oil from Canada. Quickly realizing the scope of this toxic threat,
Parras began a personal crusade to fight for better air.

Parras's community, a primarily Latino, low-income area along the
Houston Ship Channel's industrial corridor, is home to several of
the nation's most polluted schools.23

This is the targeted destination of the Keystone XL pipeline, where
more than 90 percent of the heavy, sulfurous tar sands crude will be
refined. An additional 900,000 barrels of tar sands every day will
further poison this community if the Keystone XL pipeline is built.

The massive network of refineries along the ship channel is one
of the only places in North America with the industrial capacity
to create fuel from the tarry sludge of bitumen flowing from
Canada. Consequently, it is already one of the worst public health
zones in the nation.

A study done by the University of Texas and the city of Houston in
cooperation with the EPA targeted twelve hazardous air pollutants
generated by petrochemical refining; all twelve chemicals registered
present in Parras's community. Eight are known carcinogens, and
registered at elevated levels.24

Parras sees the tragic manifestations of these chemicals in the
children of his community.

"A lot of kids are getting leukemia. You have a 56 percent greater
chance within a two mile radius of the Houston Ship Channel of
contracting leukemia" says Parras, referring to the EPA study.

With Houston refineries planning to process an additional 900,000
barrels of the world's dirtiest oil every day from the Keystone XL
pipeline, rates of pollution and disease in the area can only be
expected to increase.

At public EPA hearings, Parras and citizens from the ship channel
area testified that refining tar sands would unfairly burden residents
who already suffer from the oil industry's pollution.

Despite the toxic environment created by the oil industry, Parras's
community is firmly rooted, and many feel it is a home worth fighting
for. "Once you develop a sense of community its hard to leave. Even
in the face of pollution it is difficult to break up culture."

Yet the massive petroleum refining corridor in their backyard takes
its toll on many, and rates of diseases associated with exposure to
petrochemical manufacturing are high. Tar sands are the last thing
ship channel residents need.

"Your body gets used to the smells," Parras says, "but not the
effects."

your body gets used to the smells,

Juan parras Houston/Port Arthur, Texas but not the effects.

cArolyn HArKness lives on an historic homestead in Union County, South
Dakota, once rated among the top five rural counties in America for
quality of life. That changed when rumors of a "gorilla" coming to
the community began three years ago. That "gorilla" turned out to be
Hyperion, a tar sands processing plant that, if built, will be the
sixth largest refinery in the nation.

Hyperion's tar sands refining threatens to destroy a bucolic farming
community with massive industrial development, unprecedented
levels of air pollution, and contamination of pure local water
supplies. Hyperion's pollution permit application calls for nearly
7,600 tons of airborne toxins to be pumped into Union County, including
ammonia, sulfur dioxide and volatile organic compounds. This does
not include the 19 million tons of carbon dioxide the plant plans to
emit---more per barrel than any other refinery in the country.25

The refinery would draw ten million gallons of fresh water a day
from the Missouri River, but Hyperion has not told the community how
it plans to treat the water it will contaminate or where it will be
disposed. Harkness worries the results could be devastating to the
fragile aquifer that supports her farm.

What's more, Harkness and others suspect the slew of pollution from
Hyperion will be just the beginning, as more heavy industry would
move in to support the functions of the massive tar sands refinery.

When Hyperion realtors were buying land rights, they told people there
would be a one- to two-mile buffer zone around the project. Harkness
says the realtors did not give details on the plant itself, yet they
pressured landowners to sign away their land. After acquiring the
land they needed, the developers changed their plans for the site.

Now, there is no buffer. The refinery would be about 300 feet from
Harkness's front door.

When Harkness found out where the plant would be located, she was
devastated. "I remember standing there, feeling like someone had
slugged me in the stomach. I love this land so much. The quiet,
the brilliant stars at night, they could be gone forever."

"For most farmers," Harkness explains, "land is their home, their
business, their retirement and their heart. If Hyperion is built,
the richest and best farms in South Dakota will be destroyed."

The wooded pastures of the Harkness homestead sit on a huge aquifer,
with the Brule Creek twisting through it.  Discharges from the massive
operation would enter her water less than a quarter mile upstream,
contaminating the pristine water supply that has supplied her farm
since the pioneer days.

If Harkness and her neighbors lose their fight against Hyperion,
she fears she will have to abandon her home to preserve her family's
health and continue her cherished, rural way of life.

"Where could we go?  We are too young to retire and too old to start
over," she says.

Moreover, Harkness worries for her land because she believes she has
a responsibility to take care of the water and farmland that have
sustained her family.

"This land belongs to God and it is our responsibility to save it for
future generations.  It has treated us well," she says. "We need to
return the favor."

your body gets used to the smells,

if Hyperion is built, the richest and best farms in south dakota
carolyn Harkness Union County, South Dakota will be destroyed.

ed cABle lives three miles from the footprint slated for Hyperion's
tar sands oil refinery. When he and his neighbors first heard about
the development, all they were told was that it was for an "undisclosed
purpose." That got him worried.

"If they won't tell you what it is, it's probably something you won't
like," Cable says.

Once Cable learned that the development would be a refinery designed
to process the dirtiest oil in the world, he sprang into action,
holding community meetings and organizing a community group, "Save
Union County," to fight the project.

He's lived in the area since 1969, and the last thing he wants to
see is the rolling hills of his farming community transformed into
an industrial sacrifice zone.

"Hyperion's tar sands will destroy some of the best farmland in South
Dakota," Cable says. "It will destroy hundreds of years of quality
air and water."

Cable looked into emissions from similar refineries in Texas, and he
believes the toxic emissions estimated by Hyperion in their permit
application are understated by nearly a factor of ten.

According to their permit application, Hyperion plans to spew
a combined 3,000 tons of nitrogen oxides and carbon monoxide
"responsible for smog and ground-level ozone", nearly 300 tons of
ammonia, over 800 tons of sulfur dioxide (which causes acid rain),
nearly 500 tons of highly carcinogenic volatile organic compounds,
over 3,000 tons of asthma-inducing particulate matter, and more

America does not need to put its own citizens and environment at risk
just so foreign oil companies can increase their profits. Instead
of sacrificing our drinking water, air, and farmland to import the
world's dirtiest oil, we should be investing in clean energy.

Wind, solar, efficiency measures, and a 21st-century transportation
system will help end our dependence on oil and stop destructive
projects like The Keystone XL pipeline. In fact, just increasing
our fuel economy by 2.5 miles per gallon will save more oil than the
largest tar sands pipelines can deliver. 27

oil is a dirty and dangerous form of energy---and tar sands oil is
scraping the bottom of the global oil barrel. For decades, the oil
industry ignored tar sands because they are among the dirtiest and
most expensive fuels to produce in the world. But instead of backing
innovations to break our dangerous addiction to a quickly vanishing
and toxic source, the oil industry wants to lock in our dependence
on oil for years to come.

For Americans, the costs are too high and the benefits are too low. We
are a nation of innovators, and expanding our reliance on dirty tar
sands oil represents a huge step backwards in our progress towards
a clean energy future.

ed cable Union County, South Dakota

[the tar sands refinery] will destroy hundreds of years of quality
air and water.

than 19 million tons of carbon dioxide.26

The emissions from this single source will all but guarantee South
Dakota's failure to meet the EPA's National Ambient Air Quality
standards. The microscopic soot particles that will be released by the
ton from Hyperion are the most dangerous form of particulate matter,
capable of penetrating deep into the lungs, causing respiratory
disease and increasing risks of heart attacks.

Hyperion also intends to withdraw ten million gallons of water a day
from the Missouri River, but the company hasn't yet released a plan
for what they will do with the wastewater once it has been used to
process the toxic tar sands oil.

Save Union County's fight against the tar sands giant recently
made enormous progress. Based on a legal challenge that Cable and
his neighbors filed against Hyperion, the South Dakota Department
of Environment and Natural Resources declared Hyperion's permit
application incomplete and denied Hyperion's initial application to
pollute Union County's air. Cable says it will be at least a year
before the project can move forward. Cable is proud that he and his
neighbors were able to achieve this victory in the face of tremendous
pressure from the powerful and well- funded oil company.

For the moment Cable is taking a breath of clean air, but he knows
Hyperion's backers will not quit easily. He's preparing for a long
fight ahead to protect Union County, and the recent victory has
strengthened his resolve.

"[They] thought they had a slam dunk, but we took a stand to protect
our home," Cable says. "They didn't expect so much resistance, but
we're committed to keeping Hyperion and tar sands from destroying
our county."

conclUsion TheSe STOrieS rePreSenT juST a
fraCTiOn Of The PeOPle WhO Suffer The True COSTS
of TAr SAnDS oIL. There Are MAny More peopLe WhoSe STorIeS reMAIn UnToLD.

[the tar sands refinery] will destroy hundreds of years of quality
air and water.