
KEY OBJECTIVE:

• Provide assurance that the State is acutely aware of the need
for a timely decision on the TransCanada's Keystone XL application
and is not interested in unnecessarily delaying its decisional process.

CONTEXT: You will be speaking with Russell Girling, CEO of TransCanada,
who requested this meeting. This is part of an effort in the past
few weeks by TransCanada and the Canadian Government on a number
of fronts to reach out to the U.S.  Government on TransCanada's
Presidential permit application for the Keystone XL pipeline. Last
week, TransCanada's general counsel met with the White House Council
on Environmental Quality (CEQ) and asserted that State should proceed
directly to a final EIS and that unless the project was permitted before
the end of 2011, TransCanada would have to cancel the project. In
addition, last week Deputy Minister for Natural Resources Canada, Serge
Dupont, in a meeting with PDAS Dan Clune at State, devoted substantial
time to the issue of Keystone project and the oil sands. He stressed
the importance of the pipeline for both countries and, recognizing
how contentious the issue has become, explained the progress made on
reducing the environmental impacts of the oil sands.

SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED


[REVIEW AUTHORITY: Adolph Eisner, Senior Reviewer]




Date: 04/27/2012 UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case
No. F-2011-26077 U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2011-26077 Date:
04/27/2012 Cl 8 7 613 5 0




SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED 2

Prime Minister Harper, speaking to reporters at a news conference with
President Obama last week also reiterated the same theme, remarking
"that it's in the United States' national security interest to import
oil from Canada" and that Canada is "the most secure, most stable and
friendliest location (the United States) can possibly get that energy."

Keystone XL Application: Russell Girling's visit comes as the
Department is about to decide whether to issue a Supplemental EIS
requesting further public comment or a Final EIS. This decision
may have a major impact on timing. TransCanada has stated to State
that a Supplemental EIS would likely result in higher construction
costs if it misses the crucial summer and fall months for this year
for pipeline construction (assuming a permit were granted) and must
delay construction until 2012.  Mr. Girling will likely bring up three
issues: 1) that a Supplemental EIS is not needed because TransCanada
has already met what is legally required to address the potential
environmental impacts of the pipeline 2) that a recent report from
Department of Energy shows that the Keystone project will not impact
the pace of oil extraction in Canada and 3) that the project is at
risk of cancellation if a decision is not made soon.

Background

The major issue for the Department in the next few weeks is the status
of the next version of the EIS: whether it will be a Final EIS,
allowing the Department to proceed to the final interagency process
for consideration of the Presidential Permit, or a Supplemental EIS,
requiring another public comment period. The Department's decision
on this matter will have a substantial impact on the - schedule,
adding possibly up to six months to the environmental review process.
The Department's decision on whether to issue a Supplemental EIS
depends in large part upon three studies focused on: 1) analyzing
the effects of the pipeline on the market for crude oil; two, how
oil sands will affect pipeline safety; and 3) a summary review of
the literature analysing greenhouse gas emissions associated with oil
sands production. All three studies will likely be ready within weeks,
which should allow the Department to make a decision on whether to
issue a Supplemental or Final EIS within the first quarter of the 2011.

Other Issues

SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2011-26077 Date:
04/27/2012 Department of State Case No. F-2011-26077 Date: 04/27/2012
018 7 613 5 0 U.S.




SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED 3 Two other topics that could be mentioned
during the meeting are 1) the State Department's consideration of
an alternative route for the pipeline to avoid Nebraska's Ogallalah
aquifer and the Sandhills area; and 2) the Bakken Marketlink, a
TransCanada project that will allow oil producers in Montana and South
Dakota to utilize the Keystone XL pipeline to ship their oil to the
Gulf Coast.  Many members of Congress, especially state and federal
legislators from Nebraska, have written letters to State opposing to
the current routing of the pipeline, as it passes directly through the
Ogalalah aquifer and the Sandhills region, a mixed grass prairie of
ecological importance. Both Senators from Nebraska, Senators Johanns
and Nelson, as well as Nebraska Governor Heineman, have requested that
the State Department consider an alternative path for the Keystone XL
pipeline, including one parallel to an existing right of way located
east of the Sandhills region. Depending on how the Department decides
to address these concerns, a supplemental EIS may be necessary.


The Bakken Marketlink and Cushing Marketlink projects involve the
construction of additional facilities (primarily storage tanks in
Montana and Oklahoma) to allow domestic crude-oil producers to utilize
a portion of the Keystone XL pipeline capacity. Both projects were
speculative when the draft EIS was issued, but TransCanada has recently
announced they have received sufficient commercial interest to proceed
with both projects. NGOs have been requesting a Supplemental MS to
fully address the impacts of those additional projects. The Department
has not yet made a decision on whether the change in status of those
projects requires supplementation to the EIS.

Talking Points

• State understands TransCanada's desire to see a quick and positive
resolution of the Keystone XL regulatory process and that we are
acutely aware of the financial and practical issues for TransCanada
as time passes.

• The Department must conduct a thorough and balanced review of the
Keystone XL pipeline. We are seeking to ensure that all available
and relevant information and analyses are included in any final
Environmental Impact Statement.

• If raised: we are unable to provide specific details or dates as
to the next step of the Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) given
the political and legal issues surrounding the pipeline. This is a
contentious issue and we have to be cognizant of possible litigatioh
against State SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED




UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2011-26077 Date:
04/27/2012 U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2011-26077 Date:
04/27/2012 C 18 7 613 5 0




SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED 

4

• If raised: while we understand TransCanada's desire for a quick,
positive decision, the pace of the permitting process is dependent on a
variety of factors, including the company's own ongoing negotiations
with other federal agencies and entities. State will not try to
influence other federal agencies or entities in order to expedite
the process.

IF RAISED: 

Russel Girlings visit could be an opportunity to explain that TransCanada, not
just State, plays a major role in the pace of the permitting process. It is a chance to
for State to directly let the principals in TransCanada understand that, although
they are urging State to act quickly, other people within their own company have
taken positions in negotiations with other federal agencies and entities that will 
also determine the pace of the permitting process.

If Russel Girling and the TransCanada group express frustration at State's
permitting process, State should be ready to request a meeting with working level 
contacts to go over the details of TransCanada's position on three major issues 1)
the American Council on Historical Preservation's (ACHP) request to become
"officially" involved in all negotiations with Indian tribal groups over the terms of the programmatic agreement 2) the Fish and Wildlife Agency's request for State to 
become "officially" involved in all negotiations over the American Burying Beetle
(a listed Endangered Species) and 3) a decision by TransCanada on the additional
safety requirements proposed by PHMSA that they will accept on the pipeline.

conticts . toigo 4ver the Ailetails 'OfTransCanadit"spoiitfonionithree
Majorissuesie dieoMie the AmericamCotmcilion Historical
ereservation"ii(ACARreqUest.,to • t.tril;a12g OVe roupsa: alieterms:a
FOlflcially."2.:inVolvelin:alcitegotlitioni.WithIndian t reclu,e4:for
State MthiprOganmc,et)hfisand:WleAgq ;: involVedin4finegetiations
over the.AinericanBuryingBeetle beconie (alisted
EfidangeredSpecies).ind3)nidecisionky TranaCapaditonthe.additional
`the f      71.- safetnequirements:proposed.byttIMSALthettlierwilt
aceept Onthe:Mpelinl7 1_ .  IfOnwnent :background -on these is too,
*implicated for -A/S at this , • !meeting?  ..Also; 'the biggest
item:.'  - At the same time, State needs to stress that we have no
desire to influence ;Statels•weiting for is ,for our:.  tontracter
•to coselete'•adits ■to‘the • TransCanada's actions in order
to expedite the process. We will work with other • Eid. , These
other 'items, have not.  , caused any delay 'to tie els', federal
agencies to reach terms that mutually agreeable to. both parties.
far,bicniikSly,:to.f      youtabe'poingr,'4,4 ito.'go..down this road,
-I -think: t ypo Meld to tell Kerri‘Aroe'the.  -.  Although there is
a small chance that Mr. Girling will not be aware of these issues,
,specf lies. ao that -she',is awathtof ; others in his party,
specifically Robert Jones and James White, will be aware of the
ithera.ind can 'respond'. , If she. were keepsake the statement
.inrthetext; • specific details of the negotiations, and should
be able to meet with State's ,Girling'• likely thsponse +will be.'
!!".what 'people' and.  "what' agencies: working level contacts.