## Keystone Oil Pipeline achieves key milestone in U.S. Final federal environmental impact assessment issued

CALGARY, Alberta – January 11, 2008 – TransCanada Corporation (TSX,
NYSE: TRP) (TransCanada) today announced TransCanada Keystone Pipeline,
LP (Keystone) received the Final Environmental Impact Statement from
the United States Department of State regarding the Keystone Pipeline
project and Cushing extension, stating the pipeline would result in
limited adverse environmental impacts.

The Final Environmental Impact Statement, a requirement for the
Presidential Permit process, is the result of nearly two years of
detailed analysis of the Keystone Pipeline project proposal by more
than a dozen U.S. federal agencies and other interested stakeholders. A
decision is anticipated to be issued in mid-February regarding
Keystone’s application for a Presidential Permit authorizing the
construction and operation of the facilities at the U.S./Canada
border crossing.

“This outcome is another significant milestone in advancing the
Keystone Pipeline project,” says Hal Kvisle, TransCanada president
and chief executive officer. “We plan to begin construction in
second quarter 2008 to achieve an in-service date of fourth quarter
2009 in order to move the growing supply of Canadian crude oil to
key U.S. markets.”

Keystone received National Energy Board approval last year for two
major regulatory applications to construct and operate the Canadian
portion of the project. Applications for other U.S. regulatory
approvals at the state level are proceeding and decisions are expected
to be received during the first quarter of 2008.

The 3,456-kilometre (2,148-mile) Keystone Pipeline will transport crude
oil from Hardisty, Alberta to U.S. Midwest markets at Wood River and
Patoka, Illinois and to Cushing, Oklahoma. The Canadian portion of
the project involves the conversion of approximately 864 kilometres
(537 miles) of existing Canadian Mainline pipeline facilities from
natural gas to crude oil transmission service and construction of
approximately 373 kilometres (232 miles) of pipeline, pump stations
and terminal facilities at Hardisty, Alberta. The U.S. portion of
the project includes construction of approximately 2,219 kilometres
(1,379 miles) of pipeline and pump stations. It is expected that on
start-up in late 2009 Keystone will be capable of delivering 435,000
barrels per day to Wood River and Patoka, Illinois. It will be expanded
to 590,000 barrels per day and extended to Cushing, Oklahoma in late
2010.  To view a map of the proposed pipeline route and obtain other
information about the Keystone Pipeline, please visit the project
web page at www.transcanada.com/keystone.
