**ES.0 EXECUTIVE SUMMARY**

**ES.1 INTRODUCTION**

TransCanada Keystone Pipeline, L.P. (Keystone) has applied to the
U.S. Department of State (DOS) for a Presidential Permit for the
construction, connection, operation, and maintenance of facilities
at the U.S. border for a proposed pipeline and associated facilities
for importation of crude oil from Canada. DOS receives and considers
applications for Presidential Permits for such oil pipelines pursuant
to the authority delegated to it by the President of the United States
under Executive Order (EO) 13337 as amended (69 Federal Register [FR]
25299). DOS has determined that issuance of a Presidential Permit
would constitute a major federal action that may have a significant
impact upon the environment within the context of the National
Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (NEPA) (42 United States Code [USC]
§ 4321 et seq.).

DOS, as the lead agency for the environmental impact statement (EIS),
discussed the appropriate level of participation required with other
federal agencies that will be required to issue permits associated
with the proposed Keystone Project. The following federal agencies
have elected to participate as cooperating agencies in the process:

• Advisory Council on Historic Preservation

• U.S. Environmental Protection Agency

• Natural Resources Conservation Service

• U.S. Army Corps of Engineers

• U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service

• Farm Service Agency

• U.S. Department of Energy

• Rural Utilities Service

The following agencies have agreed to provide technical assistance
to the environmental review:

• U.S. Department of Transportation -- Office of Pipeline Safety

• U.S. Department of Transportation -- Federal Highway Administration

• Federal Energy Regulatory Commission

• Department of Homeland Security

• Council on Environmental Quality

• National Park Service

• Bureau of Indian Affairs

State agencies also were consulted to ensure that their needs for
state permitting analyses would be assessed in the EIS. Potentially
affected Native American tribes with interests along the proposed
pipeline corridor were invited to be part of the public scoping and
DOS consultation process.

**ES.2 PROPOSED ACTION -- DOS PREFERRED ALTERNATIVE**

Keystone proposes to construct and operate a crude oil pipeline and
related facilities to transport Western Canadian Sedimentary Basin
(WCSB) crude oil from an oil supply hub near Hardisty, Alberta,
Canada to destinations in the Midwest United States. In total, the
Keystone Project would consist of the Mainline Project (approximately
1,849 miles of pipeline, including about 767 miles in Canada and 1,082
miles in the United States) and the Cushing Extension (296 miles of
pipeline in the United States). Including the Cushing Extension, the
total length of pipeline in the United States would be 1,380 miles. The
Keystone Project initially would have the nominal transport capacity of
435,000 barrels per day (bpd) of crude oil from the oil supply hub near
Hardisty to an existing terminal and refinery at Wood River, Illinois,
and an existing terminal at Patoka, Illinois. Additional pumping
capacity could be added to increase the average throughput to 591,000
bpd if warranted by future shipper demand and market conditions.

In the United States, the proposed Mainline Project comprises 1,082
miles of new 30-inch-diameter pipe from the Canada/U.S. border to
Patoka, Illinois. The Cushing Extension would consist of 296 miles of
36-inch-diameter pipe extending from Steele City, Nebraska to Cushing,
Oklahoma. This EIS describes and evaluates the U.S. portion of the
proposed Keystone Project, including both the Mainline Project and
Cushing Extension.

The objective of the Proposed Route was to meet the original Project
objective of delivering crude oil to Wood River and Patoka, Illinois
as well as delivering oil to Cushing, Oklahoma. To accomplish the
objective of delivering crude oil to Wood River and Patoka, and
eventually to Cushing, the Proposed Route follows the shortest route
possible between the Canadian border and Cushing. The route crosses
the U.S./Canada border at Pembina County North Dakota, and follows
a southerly track through North Dakota, South Dakota, and Nebraska
(see Figure 2.1-1). At Steele City on the Nebraska/ Kansas border,
the Mainline Project of the Proposed Route turns east through the
northeast corner of Kansas and crosses Missouri to terminals at Wood
River and Patoka, Illinois. The Cushing Extension continues south from
Steele City through Kansas to Ponca City and Cushing, Oklahoma. This
route would facilitate access to Cushing while preserving access
to the original markets in Illinois, and would provide collocation
opportunities along the existing Platte pipeline.

The length of pipeline proposed within each affected state is listed
in Table ES-1.

**TABLE ES-1 Miles of Pipeline by State for the Keystone Project**

**ND SD NE KS MO IL OK Total**

Mainline Project 217.8 219.9 214.6 98.7 274.0 56.9 0.0 1,081.9

Cushing Extension 0.0 0.0 2.5 210.4 0.0 0.0 83.1 296.0

**Keystone Project total**

**217.8** **219.9 217.1** **309.1** **274.0** **56.9** **83.1**

**1,377.9**

Keystone would construct the 30- and 36-inch-diameter pipelines within
a 110-foot-wide corridor, consisting of a temporary 60-foot-wide
construction right-of-way (ROW) and a 50-foot-wide permanent ROW.

Ownership of lands that would be crossed by the proposed Keystone
Project is identified in Table ES-2.

**TABLE ES-2 Ownership of Land Crossed by the Keystone Project
(miles)**

**Federal** **Tribal** **State** **Private** **Total**

**Mainline Project** North Dakota 0.0 0.0 0.8 217.0 217.8

South Dakota 0.0 0.0 0.0 219.9 219.9

Nebraska 0.0 0.0 0.0 214.6 214.6

Kansas 0.0 0.0 0.0 98.7 98.7

Missouri 0.0 0.0 0.5 273.5 274.0

Illinois 3.0 0.0 0.0 53.9 56.9

*Mainline Project subtotal* *3.0* *0.0* *1.3* *1,077.6* *1,081.9*

**Cushing Extension** Nebraska 0.0 0.0 0.0 2.5 2.5

Kansas 3.6 0.0 0.0 206.8 210.4

Oklahoma 0.0 0.0 3.6 79.5 83.1

*Cushing Extension subtotal* *3.6 0.0* *3.6 288.8 296*

**Keystone Project total** **6.6** **0.0** **4.9** **1,366.4**

**ES.3 PURPOSE AND NEED FOR THE PROPOSED ACTION**

The primary purpose of the proposed pipeline is to transport crude
oil from the WCSB across the border to meet the growing demand by
refineries and markets in the United States. The need for the Project
is dictated by:

• Increasing WCSB heavy crude oil supply and uncertain availability
of oil from world supplies;

• U.S. demand for crude oil, particularly in the Midwest and Gulf
States supported by the Keystone Mainline and Cushing Extension; and

• Pipeline capacity available to ship WCSB crude oil.

**ES.3.1 Increasing Western Canadian Sedimentary Basin Crude Oil
Supply**

According to Oil and Gas Journal*,* Canada has 179 billion barrels
of proven oil reserves, with 174 billion of those reserves in oil
sands located in the WCSB. The Alberta Energy and Utilities Board
also estimates that 174 billion barrels of proven reserves are
recoverable from Canada's oil sands. The province of Alberta is now
widely accepted as having the second largest reserves in the world,
second only to Saudi Arabia.

Crude oil production from the entire WCSB, including oil sands and
conventional production, is now at 2.3 million bpd. According to
CNEB, conventional crude oil production in the WCSB is expected to
decline but because of rapidly growing oil sands production total
WCSB production will rise to 3.9 million bpd by 2015.

**ES.3.2 Uncertainty of World Oil Supplies**

Global oil production capacity and consumption remain tightly balanced
after 4 years of rapid demand growth in Asia, the United States,
and the Middle East. DOS and industry analysts project that it will
remain so into the medium term. The ability and willingness of major
oil and gas producers to step up investment in order to meet rising
global demand are particularly uncertain. Political instability in
several of the United States' top 11 suppliers is also expected to
increase demand for crude oil from Canada. Canada's expected production
increases, coupled with the adverse factors affecting other major
U.S. suppliers make it likely that an ever larger share of U.S. oil
imports will be sourced from this stable and nearby supplier. Even if
the share of total imported oil in overall U.S. demand remains the
same or declines slightly in coming years, as expected, DOS expects
that heavy oil imports from the WCSB will continue to increase.

**ES.3.3 U.S. Crude Oil Market Demand**

According to the U.S. Energy Information Administration (EIA),
U.S. consumption of liquid fuels (crude oil and refined products)
is projected to total 26.9 million bpd in 2030, an increase of 6.2
million bpd over the 2005 total. Most of this increased demand is
expected to be met with crude oil imports. Canada has traditionally
been the United State's largest supplier of oil due to its reliability
and proximity to U.S. markets. Canada's share of U.S. oil imports has
risen from 15 to 16 percent over the last 10 years, while the whole
of the Western Hemisphere now accounts for 41 percent of U.S. oil
imports. Demand for the proportion of heavy to light crude used by
U.S. refiners has increased over the last 20 years as world supplies
of light crude have diminished in proportion to supplies of heavy
and extra-heavy crude. Many U.S. refiners have completed or are in
the process of completing retrofits to handle the heavier types of
crude in response to this change in the world supply. In recent years,
crude oil imports from Venezuela (most of which are of heavy grade)
have declined. The heavy crude oil that Keystone will deliver to
U.S. refiners is ideally suited to replace the loss of these types
of crude and meet the expected increase in demand.

**ES.3.4 Mainline Project and Cushing Extension Demand**

In December 2005, Keystone provided shippers an opportunity to
participate in the Keystone Project by entering into contractual
commitments for pipeline capacity. Shippers committed to binding
contracts for 340,000 bpd. These binding commitments demonstrate
the need for incremental pipeline capacity and access to Canadian
crude supplies, and represent a commitment to utilize the Keystone
Project. Keystone expects that the remainder of the excess capacity
will be utilized by non-contract shippers at the tariff rate
approved by the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) (ENSR
2006a). Potential shippers also have expressed strong interest in a
proposed pipeline extension to the Cushing market area. TransCanada
conducted an Open Season process for the Mainline Project which ran
from November 4 to December 1, 2005. As a result of the Open Season,
TransCanada has secured firm, long-term contracts totaling 340,000
bpd, with an average duration of 18 years. Keystone anticipates that
existing contracts will be renewed and additional contracts will be
entered into such that the average contract term will continue beyond
18 years. This reasoning is based on the amount of crude oil reserves
in the WCSB and the expected increase in production from the oil sands
(TransCanada 2007c). A binding Open Season for the Cushing Extension
closed at noon on March 14, 2007 (ENSR 2006a).

**ES.3.5 Pipeline Capacity from the Western Canadian Sedimentary
Basin**

Nearly all of the 1.9 million bpd of crude oil imported from Canada
in 2006 came from the WCSB, and all of that was transported through
three major pipeline systems: Enbridge, Kinder Morgan Express, and
Kinder Morgan Trans Mountain. Total capacity from the WCSB for crude
oil to U.S. markets now stands

at 2.4 million bpd. However, the majority of WCSB crude continues to be
sold into the U.S. Midwest where a large proportion of U.S. refining
capacity is located, and an increasing amount is forwarded on
to refiners in the U.S. Gulf Coast to offset declines in offshore
production. These two districts are directly and indirectly served by
the Enbridge system and Kinder Morgan Express, which together have
a capacity of 2.1 million bpd. Total capacity for heavy oil on the
Enbridge and Kinder Morgan Express systems now stands at 1.2 million
bpd. In 2006, approximately 1 million bpd of heavy crude was exported
from the WCSB to the United States via these two pipelines.

Even with modifications to existing systems and de-bottlenecking
efforts that are underway by Enbridge, it is likely that crude oil
exports from the WCSB to the United States will exceed available
pipeline capacity in 2009, necessitating the construction of a new
pipeline to facilitate continued importation of crude oil.

Exactly how much more capacity will be needed in the short term to
mid term can be estimated. Given CNEB projections of an additional
1.6 million bpd of WCSB production over the current level by 2015,
expected increased U.S. demand, and a similar proportion continued to
be consumed by Canada (30 percent), an additional 1.1 million bpd of
pipeline capacity would be needed by 2015 to accommodate U.S. crude
oil imports from the WCSB. This increase in capacity would justify
construction of Keystone's planned 450,000-bpd pipeline, and would
necessitate additional pipeline construction to meet the remaining
700,000 bpd of capacity.

**ES.4 PUBLIC INVOLVEMENT PROCESS**

**ES.4.1 Scoping**

On October 4, 2006, DOS issued a Notice of Intent (NOI) to prepare an
EIS. The NOI informed the public about the proposed action, announced
plans for scoping meetings, invited public participation in the
scoping process, and solicited public comments for consideration in
establishing the scope and content of the EIS. The NOI was published in
the Federal Register and distributed to affected landowners, Federal
agencies, Native American tribes, State agencies, Municipalities
and counties, elected officials, non-governmental organizations, the
media, and other interested individuals. DOS held 13 separate scoping
meetings in the vicinity of the Proposed Route to provide opportunity
for public comment on the scope of the EIS. Meetings were held in
Michigan and Lisbon, North Dakota; Clark and Yankton, South Dakota;
Stanton and Seward, Nebraska; St. Charles and Carrolton, Missouri;
Collinsville, Illinois; Seneca, Abilene, and El Dorado, Kansas; and
Morrison, Oklahoma. The official scoping period ended on November 30,
2006; however, any comments received after this date were considered
in the Draft EIS.

DOS received verbal, written, and electronic comments during the
scoping comment period. All verbal scoping comments formally presented
at the meetings were recorded and transcribed. Additional written
scoping comments were received on comment forms provided to the public
at the meetings and in letters. Table ES-3 summarizes the issues
identified and comments received during the public scoping process
for the Keystone Project. For each comment, the table references the
section in this FEIS that addresses the concern. Details are provided
in the Scoping Summary Report (Appendix A).

**TABLE ES-3 Issues Identified and Comments Received during the
Public Scoping**

**Process for the Keystone Pipeline Project**

**Issue Comment**

**Section Where Comment/Issue Is Addressed in**

Purpose and Need Need for the Mainline Project and the Cushing
Extension, expected life of the pipeline, agency involvement, and
required approvals.

Project Description Distance to adjacent structures, construction
methods, abandonment plans, sources of Keystone Project materials,
construction schedule, maintenance and inspection plans and procedures,
expected service life of the pipeline, right-of-way (ROW) revegetation,
pipeline temperature, protection measures, operations, construction
impacts to adjacent areas, powering, pipeline security, hydrostatic
testing, and pump stations.

Alternatives Selection of alternatives, route adjustments, use of
abandoned rail ROWs, route selection, routes that avoid sensitive
areas, Kinder Morgan and Enbridge Pipelines, shipping refined products
instead of a crude oil pipeline, renewable energy sources, seasonal
avoidance of construction in agricultural areas, collocation with
other ROWs, and adding a new refinery along the Mainline Project
rather than constructing the Cushing Extension.

Geology Potential rock slope instability and effects of earthquakes
and fault lines.

Soils and Sediments Soil compaction and settlement, topsoil segregation
during construction, replacement of top soils after construction and
abandonment, soil erosion, streambank erosion, pipeline effects on
soil temperature, and soil instability.

Water Resources Impacts on springs, aquifers, and water wells; water
supply contingencies in the event of a spill; impacts to septic systems
and sewage treatment facilities; stream channel erosion; impacts to
dikes, dams, and reservoirs; runoff during construction; effects on
drain tiles and drainage systems; and impacts on flood protection.

Wetlands Impacts and mitigation measures, stabilization during
construction, enforcement of wetland protection requirements.

Terrestrial Vegetation Impacts on prairies and woodlands, impacts
of pipeline temperature on vegetation and crops, revegetation of
affected area, impacts on crop growth, invasive and noxious weeds,
use of herbicides near organic farms, and effects on old-growth trees.

Fish and Wildlife Impacts on game animals and their habitats; and
impacts on deer, turkey, frogs, toads, bald eagles, beaver, pheasants,
and quail.

3.6 and 3.7

**ES.4.2 Comments on the Draft EIS**

The 2007 Keystone Oil Pipeline Project Draft Environmental Impact
Statement (Draft EIS) was released for public review on August 10,
2007. The public comment period ended on September 24, 2007; however,
additional comments were accepted into November 2007. Comments
were sent to DOS by email, website link (e-comments), phone, and
U.S. mail. From September 4 through September 20, 2007, 13 public
meetings were held to solicit oral testimony on the Draft EIS. Written
comments also were accepted. These meetings were held at the following
locations along the pipeline corridor and corresponded with the
locations of the scoping meetings held in October 2006:

September 4 -- Carrolton Missouri September 5 -- St. Charles, Missouri
September 6 -- Collinsville, Illinois September 11 -- Michigan, North
Dakota and Yankton, South Dakota September 12 -- Lisbon, North Dakota
and Stanton, Nebraska September 13 -- Clark, South Dakota and Seward,
Nebraska September 17 -- Seneca, Kansas September 18 -- Abilene, Kansas
September 19 -- El Dorado, Kansas September 20 -- Ponca City, Oklahoma.

In total, 67 people provided oral testimony at these meetings,
incorporating 230 individual comments on the 2007 Draft EIS. These
comments were recorded and transcribed. In addition to the oral
testimony, 110 letters, cards, emails, e-comments, or telephone
conversation records incorporating 1009 comments were received from
the public, agencies, the Applicant (Keystone), and other interested
groups and stakeholders. All written and oral comments and responses
are summarized in Appendix A.

**ES.5 ALTERNATIVES CONSIDERED**

Alternatives to the Keystone Project were analyzed to determine
whether they would be reasonable and environmentally preferable to
the proposed action. A No Action Alternative, system alternatives,
major route alternatives, route variations, and aboveground facility
site alternatives were considered in the EIS. Identification of
alternatives to the proposed project incorporated public comments
and input received from federal, state, and local regulatory agencies.

**ES.5.1 No Action Alternative**

Under the No Action Alternative, the Keystone Project would not be
constructed and operated and issuance of a DOS Presidential Permit for
the specific action of building and operating the Keystone pipeline
would not be required. While this alternative would eliminate the
environmental impacts directly associated with the Keystone Project,
it would not meet the proposed action's purpose and need, which
involve both supply and demand components.

Without the Keystone Project, the increasing supply of crude oil
from the WCSB would not have a ready conduit for export to available
refineries and markets in the United States. Additional export pipeline
capacity above supply requirements also is required to avoid potential
situations where short-term supply exceeds export pipeline capacity.

U.S. demand for petroleum products has increased, while domestic
U.S. crude oil supplies continue to decline. The No Action Alternative
would not provide the United States with a relatively stable and

secure source of North American crude oil for Midwest and Gulf Coast
markets, thereby continuing increasing U.S. dependence on less reliable
sources of oil with higher associated shipping costs.

While the increasing demand for refined crude oil products could
be met by other projects or alternatives, it is purely speculative
to predict the resulting effects and actions that could be taken by
local governments and other suppliers or refineries in the region,
as well as any associated direct and indirect environmental impacts
of these actions. In addition, each of these actions may result in
environmental impacts that are less than, equal to, or greater than
those of the currently proposed Keystone Project. The No Action
Alternative also could result in more expensive and less reliable
crude oil supplies for Midwestern refineries, increasing costs and
availability of the refined products for end-users.

**ES.5.2 System Alternatives**

Several existing and proposed crude oil pipeline systems that
currently or would eventually serve the markets targeted by the
proposed Keystone Project were assessed. The analysis considered
whether those systems would meet the proposed Project objectives
while offering an environmental advantage over the proposed Project.

One system alternative considered was the expansion of the existing
Express and Platte Pipeline systems. This 1,700-mile pipeline system
transports crude oil from Alberta's oil sands in Hardisty, Alberta
to refineries in the U.S. Rocky Mountain and Midwest regions. In
the United States, the pipeline crosses Montana, Wyoming, Nebraska,
Kansas, and Missouri and terminates in Wood River, Illinois. The
Express system has been in operation from 1997, with a current
capacity of 280,000 bpd. The Platte pipeline was built in 1952, and
its current capacity is 164,000 bpd. However, as operated today,
neither of these existing systems would have the capacity of the
proposed Keystone pipeline (435,000 bpd, with a potential increase to
591,000 bpd). As they exist today, neither system could be considered
as a system alternative for the proposed action

New construction of other crude oil pipeline systems (Alberta
Clipper, Southern Lights, and Spearhead Cushing Expansion) was also
considered. Enbridge is proposing these expansion projects to help
address current and future increases in refinery demand as supply
from western Canada's vast oil sands increases. The Enbridge projects
propose to deliver crude oil directly to Midwestern markets. However,
the proposed Enbridge pipelines would provide a less direct route
to the Cushing refineries than the Cushing Extension portion of the
Keystone Project, involving the need for additional miles of pipe
and likely incurring additional impacts to resources. In addition,
these projects aim to fulfill other market demands and would not
meet the market need and in-service date proposed by the Keystone
Project. Therefore, as noted in Section ES.3.5 above, it is possible
that market demand and supply of WCSB crude could support construction
of the Keystone Project and the Enbridge projects.

**ES.5.3 Major Route Alternatives**

Three major route alternatives are considered in the EIS: the Iowa
Route Alternative, the Proposed Route Alternative, and the Direct
Route Alternative. During initial screening, it was determined that
the Iowa Route Alternative did not meet the purpose and need for
the Project, and the alternative was not considered further in the
analysis. Table ES-4 summarizes the potential impacts of the remaining
two alternatives, and the following sections discuss these alternatives
in more detail. Based on the analysis of the two alternatives, the
Proposed Route Alternative has been determined to be the preferred
route and a resource-by-resource analysis of potential impacts is
conducted in this EIS. Section ES.6 summarizes the results of the
analysis.

**ES.5.3.1 Iowa Route Alternative**

Initial route development identified a ROW that avoided Nebraska
and crossed Iowa into northern Missouri (Figure 4.3-1). Desktop data
analysis, along with limited aerial and ground reconnaissance, was
used to identify this route. The Iowa Route entered the United States
in Pembina County, North Dakota, just north of Walhalla, and ran due
south to the North Dakota/South Dakota border. In South Dakota, the
route ran generally south to the Spink County border before turning
southeast toward Plymouth County, Iowa. From there, it crossed the
South Dakota/Iowa border north of Sioux City, Iowa and continued in
a southeasterly direction through Iowa and Missouri toward a delivery
point at Salisbury, Missouri.

Here, the Iowa Route was collocated with the existing Platte pipeline
to Troy, Missouri. North of Troy, the route was moved to a power line
ROW to avoid areas where the city has expanded. East of Troy, the
route again collocated with the Platte pipeline, running east to the
Missouri/Illinois border---where it deviated from the Platte pipeline
and crossed the Mississippi River south of Wood River, Illinois. From
Wood River, the route ran eastward through the Carlyle Lake WMA into
Patoka, Illinois.

While the Iowa Route would meet the objectives of crude oil delivery
to the refineries in Illinois, it would not efficiently deliver crude
oil to Cushing, Oklahoma and would not meet the Keystone Project
purpose and need, and is not considered further.

**ES.5.3.2 Direct Alternative**

The Direct Alternative was designed to take the shortest feasible
route between the U.S./Canada border crossing and the delivery
points at Patoka and Wood River, Illinois, and from there to take
the shortest route to the delivery point at Cushing, Oklahoma (Figure
4.3-2). The straight-line path was modified to skirt populated areas
and to minimize the number of stream crossings by traveling along
drainage divides whenever possible. Between Wood River and Patoka, the
Direct Alternative follows the same alignment as Keystone's proposed
route. Between Wood River and Cushing, the Direct Alternative roughly
parallels Enbridge's Ozark pipeline corridor, but collocation was
not assumed.

A reconnaissance-level GIS analysis and comparison of the Direct
Alternative and Keystone's Proposed Route was performed (see Table
4.3-1). Based on this analysis, there is no clear environmental
advantage associated with the Direct Alternative. The pipeline miles
are very close, as are the approximate number of acres required for the
pipeline ROW (acres required for ancillary facilities, access roads,
work pads, etc. were not included in this assessment). The Direct
Alternative would require an additional 48 water body crossings,
and may require additional pump stations. It does not take advantage
of collocation with other pipeline corridors. While slightly fewer
miles of wetlands (based on available wetlands inventory mapping)
and federal lands (based on available GIS coverage) may be crossed
by the Direct Alternative, in a general sense this alternative would
likely lead to more environmental impact than would construction of
the Proposed Route.

**TABLE ES-4 Comparison of the Proposed Route and Direct**

**Alternatives for the Keystone Project**

**Comparative Category Unit Proposed**

**Route Direct**

**Alternative**

**Facility Requirements**

Pipeline length Miles 1,378 1,380

Pump station requirements Number 24 29

**Land Requirements**

Construction ROW Acres 18,300 18,303

Permanent ROW Acres 8350 8,362

**Environmental Considerations**

Water body crossings Number 213 261

Wetlands crossed Miles 44.4 40.0

Federal lands crossed Miles 4.9 2.2

**ES.5.4 Route Variations for the Proposed Route Alternative**

As part of the route development and selection process, numerous route
variations to the initially planned Mainline Project route and Cushing
Extension route have been incorporated into the proposed route. These
variations were developed based on discussions with landowners,
resource stewards, and project engineers to avoid or minimize impacts
to natural or cultural resources, reduce or eliminate engineering
and constructability concerns, and avoid or minimize conflicts with
existing or proposed residential and agricultural land uses.

In addition to the route variations described, the scoping process
identified public concerns related to route location. Many of these
comments addressed specific route variations related to avoiding
shelterbelts and aesthetic features, such as bike paths and parks. The
Scoping Report is provided as Appendix A for reference. Specific Route
Alternatives in the vicinity of Seward Nebraska, Fordville North
Dakota, and in the Hecla Sandhills Region were analyzed in detail
based on public and agency comments. Aspects of two of the variations,
the Seward Route Alternative and the Hecla Sandhills Route Alternative
were incorporated into the proposed route for the Keystone Project. The
final design alignment, where feasible, considers these minor route
variations and attempts to address additional landowner requirements,
such as crossing property along quarter section lines. Additional minor
alignment shifts would be required prior to and during construction
to accommodate unforeseeable site- specific constraints related to
other engineering, landowner, and environmental concerns.

**ES.5.5 Aboveground Facility Alternatives for the Proposed Route**

Pump stations, valve sites, temporary worksites, and pipe and
contractor yards are identified in the EIS for the Keystone
Project. The proposed project includes 24 pump stations, 44 pipe
storage yards, 36 contractor yards, and 57 main line valves (MLVs)
along the Mainline Project and 3 pump stations, 10 pipe storage yards,
6 contractor yards, and 15 MLVs along the Cushing Extension. Although
the preferred locations for these facilities were chosen based on
Project need, the proximity of public access, habitats, dwellings,
and other land and ROW issues also were considered in siting the
facilities. Over the course of Project development, pump station
locations have been relocated due to environmental, engineering or
landowner concerns.

**ES.6 PROPOSED PROJECT IMPACTS AND MITIGATION MEASURES**

Table ES-5 summaries the potential impacts of the proposed route. The
table also summaries mitigation measures proposed by Keystone
in Appendix B. Additional mitigation measures are recommended in
subsequent resource sections within the EIS and are summarized in
Section 5.0.

**ES.6.1 Geology**

The proposed project would not involve substantial topographical
alteration and would not disturb any geological features protected
by federal or state laws. Seismic activity is not expected to pose
an unacceptable risk to the project.

The proposed pipeline route does not cross any active surface mines
or quarries; however, it does cross 40 miles of underlying coal seams
between Wood River and Patoka, Illinois, where coal is mined with
underground methods (ENSR 2006a). The proposed route does not cross
the well pads of any active oil and gas wells. Extraction of oil and
gas resources would not be affected by routing operations because any
new wells would be located outside of the pipeline ROW. The proposed
pipeline would pass through deposits of sand, gravel, clay, and stone
in North Dakota, South Dakota, and Nebraska but would restrict access
to comparatively small areas of these deposits. In Kansas, Missouri,
and Illinois, the proposed route lies adjacent to an existing pipeline,
limiting impacts to potentially exploitable geologic resources.

A minimal risk of localized subsidence or collapse exists where
the pipeline crosses karst formations or passes above historic
coal mines. It is also possible that land clearing would increase
the risk of erosion and localized landslides. Most of the proposed
Keystone Project route is not located in landslide-prone terrain,
but the proposed route does cross areas of high landslide potential,
as described by the National Pipeline Mapping System at the Yankton
and Mississippi River crossings. Keystone has considered landslide
potential in its routing work and has selected crossings of these
areas where the landslide potential is reduced.

**ES.6.2 Soils**

Temporary or short term increases in soil erosion could occur
during construction, particularly in areas classified as highly
erosive. Receiving water bodies could be affected, and agricultural
soils containing agrochemical products could be eroded. During
construction, soil compaction is likely, increasing the possibility
of runoff.

Approximately 17,000 acres of farmland or rangeland within the ROW
would be taken out of production during the 18-month construction
period. Some short- or long-term decreases in agricultural productivity
are possible. In addition, tile drainage systems would be disturbed
during construction. Keystone has proposed to avoid, replace, and/or
repair any tile drainage system within the ROW.

There could be compaction-related decreases in productivity from
non-agricultural vegetated land, particularly where soils are
classified as hydric. It is also possible that boulders and rocks
unearthed during construction would be concentrated near the surface
at completion. There are also concerns that spills or leakage from
equipment could contaminate soils. Keystone has proposed construction
methods and mitigation measures to address these concerns, and
additional recommended measures are described in the EIS.

In terms of operations impacts, differential settling around the
proposed pipeline likely would be minor and would be addressed by
mitigation measures. Soil temperature impacts would be limited to
within 3 feet of the pipeline and would not result in serious soil
moisture loss; mitigation would be adequately addressed through the
recommendations discussed in the EIS

**TABLE ES-5 Summary of Potential Impacts and Proposed Mitigation
for the Proposed Route Alternative**

**Resource**

**Section Direct and Indirect Impacts Cumulative Impacts a Proposed
Mitigation Measures**

Geology 3.1 The proposed project would not involve substantial
topographical alteration and would not disturb any geological features
protected by federal or state laws, or tribal pr actice. Seismic
activity is not expected to pose an unacceptable risk to the
project. The proposed pipeline would pass through deposits of sand,
gravel, clay, and stone in North Dakota, South Dakota, and Nebraska
but would restrict access to comparatively small areas of these
deposits. The proposed route does cross areas of high landslide
potential, as described by the National Pipeline Mapping System at
the Yankton and Mississippi River crossings.

A minimal risk of localized subsidence or collapse exists where the
pipeline crosses karst formations or passes above historic coal mines.

In Kansas, Missouri, and Illinois, the proposed route lies adjacent
to an existing pipeline, limiting impacts to potentially exploitable
geologic resources.

Keystone has considered landslide potential in its routing work and
has selected crossings of these areas where the landslide potential
is reduced.

Prior to surface disturbance activities within karst terrain, a
geological investigation will be completed to determine the presence
and type of karst features. The investigation will identify the
location, distribution, and dimensions of rock cavities within the
potential influence zone of construction.

Soils 3.2 Construction. Temporary or short term increases in soil
erosion could occur during construction. Short- or long-term decreases
in agricultural productivity are possible. In addition, tile drainage
systems would be disturbed during construction. Boulders and rocks
unearthed during construction would be concentrated near the surface
at completion. There are also concerns that spills or leakage from
equipment could contaminate soils. In terms of operations impacts,
differential settling around the proposed pipeline likely would be
minor and would be addressed by mitigation measures.

Operations. Soil temperature impacts would be limited to within 3 feet
of the pipeline and would not result in serious soil moisture loss.

Potential cumulative erosion effects could occur where construction
disturbance areas overlap, or are located near each other, particularly
along the sections of Keystone pipeline that are collocated with the
Rockies Express Western Phase Project (REX Project). Both the REX
Project and the Keystone Project would apply best management practices
(BMPs) for soil management and protection to the pipelines and
appurtenant facilities. Revegetation mixtures that are appropriate to
soil conditions and expected future uses (such as grazing and wildlife
habitat) would be applied to the disturbed areas. Consequently,
the potential for cumulative erosion effects caused by one or more
of these projects is low.

Keystone has proposed to avoid, replace, and/or repair any tile
drainage system within the ROW.

The objective of topsoil handling is to maintain topsoil capability
by conserving topsoil for future replacement and reclamation and to
minimize the degradation of topsoil from compaction, rutting, loss
of organic matter, or soil mixing so that successful reclamation of
the ROW can occur.

In cultivated agricultural lands, the actual depth of the topsoil
shall be stripped from the area to be excavated above the pipeline to
a maximum of 12 inches. When grading is required, the topsoil shall
be removed from the entire area to be graded and stored. Stripped
topsoil is to be stockpiled in a windrow along the edge

**TABLE ES-5 (Continued)**

**Resource**

**Section Direct and Indirect Impacts Cumulative Impacts a Proposed
Mitigation Measures**

of the ROW to minimize the potential for subsoil and topsoil to
be mixed.

Keystone shall monitor the pipeline ROW and all stream crossings for
erosion or other potential problems that could affect the integrity of
the pipeline. Any erosion identified shall be reclaimed as expediently
as practicable by Keystone or by compensation of the landowner to
reclaim the area.

Water Resources

3.3 Surface water or groundwater quality would not be significantly
affected by normal disposal activities (such as disposal of hydrostatic
test water), non- catastrophic spills, or leaks during pipeline
construction and operation.

If construction activities of the Keystone Project and the collocated
portion of REX pipeline follow a similar schedule, there could be
a cumulative contribution to incremental sedimentation in adjacent
surface waters. Each project---as well as any other collocated
construction projects---would be required to follow BMPs and permit
conditions to protect surface waters.

Both the Keystone Project and other portions of the REX Project plan to
use surface water for hydrostatic testing. However, the timing for REX
withdrawals would not overlap with withdrawals planned for Keystone.

Temporary erosion and sediment control measures shall be installed
immediately after initial disturbance of the soil and maintained
throughout construction (on a daily basis) and reinstalled as necessary
until replaced by permanent erosion control structures or restoration
of the construction ROW is complete. These measures include sediment
barriers, trench plugs, temporary slope breakers, drainage channels
or ditches, temporary mulching, and use of a tackifier.

All extra work areas (such as staging areas and additional spoil
storage areas) at least 10 feet from the water's edge. Flagging shall
be installed at all water body crossings, across the construction ROW
at least 10 feet from the banks prior to clearing and to ensure that
riparian cover is maintained where practicable during construction.

Details for water body crossing methods and mitigation are provided
in Section 7.4 of Appendix B.

**TABLE ES-5 (Continued)**

**Resource**

**Section Direct and Indirect Impacts Cumulative Impacts a Proposed
Mitigation Measures**

Wetlands 3.4 Wetlands that would be affected within the ROW include
emergent wetlands (403 acres), forested wetlands (80 acres), perennial
riverine wetlands (37 acres), intermittent riverine wetlands (107
acres), and scrub-shrub wetlands (32 acres).

Cumulative impacts on wetlands would occur in locations where any of
the Keystone Project and REX pipelines or other construction projects
would be collocated while crossing wetlands. Total wetland impacts
within the collocated area could be about 156 acres of wetlands. Both
projects would implement mitigation measures to protect wetlands.

Other construction projects, such as town expansions, new roads and
highways, and other industrial facilities could affect additional
wetlands. None of the wetlands crossed by the Keystone Project would
be permanently filled or drained, and the contribution of the Keystone
Project on cumulative effects to wetlands in the Project area would
be minor.

Wetland boundaries shall be clearly marked in the field with signs
and/or highly visible flagging during construction. Aboveground
facilities shall not be located in a wetland, except where the location
of such facilities outside of wetlands would preclude compliance with
U.S. Department of Transportation (USDOT) pipeline safety regulations.

The width of the construction ROW shall be reduced to 85 feet or
less in standard wetlands unless non-cohesive soil conditions require
utilization of a greater width.

All extra work areas (such as staging areas and additional spoil
storage areas) shall be located at least 10 feet away from wetland
boundaries.

Sediment barriers shall be installed across the entire construction
ROW immediately upslope of the wetland to prevent sediment flow into
the wetland. Specific wetland crossing procedures are described in
Section 6.5 of Appendix B.

Terrestrial Vegetation

3.5 Grassland impacts due to pipeline construction are expected to be
minimal, and affected vegetative communities generally are expected to
reestablish within 2 years. Construction through previously untilled
prairie could produce irreversible impacts. Impacts on upland
forest and shrubland would be longer term than those anticipated
for grassland.

The total amount of vegetation that may be affected by all of the
reasonably foreseeable projects, including the Keystone Project,
is relatively small compared to the abundance of similar habitat in
the Project area. Impacts would result in the long-term and permanent
loss of non-herbaceous vegetation and would cause a small incremental
increase

Clearing, grubbing and grading of trees, brush and stumps shall be
performed in accordance with the following measures: ROW boundaries
including temporary workspaces shall be clearly staked to prevent
disturbance to unauthorized areas; timber shall be salvaged as per
landowner request; tree stumps shall be grubbed only

**TABLE ES-5 (Continued)**

**Resource**

**Section Direct and Indirect Impacts Cumulative Impacts a Proposed
Mitigation Measures**

in fragmentation of forested areas. All of the projects would
implement mitigation measures designed to minimize the potential for
erosion, revegetate disturbed areas, increase the stabilization of
site conditions, and control the spread of noxious weeds---thereby
minimizing the degree and duration of the cumulative impact on
vegetation from these projects.

5 feet either side of the trench line and where necessary for grading
a level surface; timber salvage operations shall use cut off-type saw
equipment; trees shall be felled in such a way that they fall toward
the center line of the ROW; there will be no disposal of woody debris
in wooded areas along the pipeline ROW; pruning of branches hanging
over the ROW shall be done only when necessary for construction;
and stump removal and brush clearing shall be done with bulldozers
equipped with brush rakes to preserve organic matter.

Wildlife 3.6 Pipeline construction would result in short-term
disturbance and long-term modification to wildlife habitats. However,
the total habitat loss is expected to be small in the context of
total available habitat.

Construction and operation of the Keystone Project, along with the
reasonably foreseeable projects, would result in short-term disturbance
to wildlife and long-term wildlife habitat modification. Keystone
would incrementally add to the area of habitat disrupted and to the
disturbance of resident and migrating species, causing associated
impacts on these species as they adjust to the changes brought about by
the proposed projects. Increased movement or displacement of species
dependent on the disturbed habitats could reduce carrying capacities,
reproductive effort, or survival. This potential is greater for
species for which suitable habitat is limited in the Project area or
that are otherwise sensitive to disturbance.

Spoil and topsoil wind rows shall not be located such that obvious
wildlife trails are blocked.

**TABLE ES-5 (Continued)**

**Resource**

**Section Direct and Indirect Impacts Cumulative Impacts a Proposed
Mitigation Measures**

Fisheries 3.7 Possible impacts to fisheries could occur through
siltation and disturbance of streams crossed by the proposed
pipeline. Any short-term disturbance caused by instream activities
likely would resemble natural high-flow events in the stream. Keystone
has proposed to undertake hydrostatic testing during spring, summer,
and autumn, overlapping with key spawning months of April to July. This
overlap could affect some sensitive species during breeding.

Because construction schedules for the REX pipeline and the other
non-linear projects are different from the Keystone Project, cumulative
impacts on fisheries would not occur. If construction of facilities
or other projects does become concurrent due to schedule changes,
the Keystone Project would contribute to cumulative sedimentation
impacts on fisheries. Nevertheless, these impacts would be short
term and minor due to implementation of mitigation measures and the
requirements of any individual state permits to minimize impacts
while crossing water bodies.

Following the proposed mitigation procedures during construction
would result in minor short-term impacts to aquatic habitats
and organisms. To mitigate impacts, construction would involve
dry-ditch techniques at crossings where the timing of construction
does not adequately protect environmentally sensitive water bodies,
as determined by the appropriate regulatory authority. Horizontal
directional drilling (HDD) would be used at designated major and
sensitive water bodies.

For hydrostatic testing, the intake hose shall be screened to prevent
the entrainment of fish or debris. The hose shall be kept off the
bottom of the water body. Pumps used for hydrostatic testing within
100 feet of any water body or wetland shall be operated and refueled
in accordance with Section 3.0 of Appendix B. Adequate flow rates in
the water body shall be maintained to protect aquatic life, provide for
all water body uses, and provide for downstream withdrawals of water by
existing users. Chemicals shall not be used in the test water. Water
containing oil or other substances in sufficient amounts to create
a visible color film or sheen on the surface of the receiving water
shall not be discharged. Any water obtained or discharged shall comply
with permit requirements. Detailed mitigation measures for dewatering
the pipeline are provided in Section 8.4 of Appendix B.

**TABLE ES-5 (Continued)**

**Resource**

**Section Direct and Indirect Impacts Cumulative Impacts a Proposed
Mitigation Measures**

Threatened and Endangered Species

3.8 Preliminary data identified 55 federally or state- listed
threatened, endangered, or candidate species potentially occurring
in or near the Keystone Project ROW. Potential impacts on individual
species include habitat loss, alteration, and fragmentation; decreased
breeding; direct mortality; and reduced survival or reproduction.

Because the Keystone pipeline would parallel the REX pipeline across
Kansas and Missouri, many of the state- and federally listed threatened
and endangered species could potentially be affected by construction
and operation of these projects. Each project is required to consult
with federal, state, and local agencies to determine which species may
occur within each individual project area; evaluate potential impacts
on those species during construction and operation; and implement
measures to avoid, minimize, or mitigate impacts on special-status
species and their habitats.

Keystone has been and will continue to contract a qualified biologist
to conduct surveys of sensitive species associated with particular
habitats along the pipeline corridor. Details regarding mitigation
measures for potential encounters with threatened and endangered
species are provided in Section 2.9 of Appendix B.

Land Use 3.9 Agricultural, rangeland, forestland, recreational/special
use, commercial, and residential land use classes would be affected
in areas intersected by the proposed ROW. The largest amount of
acreage that would be affected by the Keystone Project would be
agricultural land, followed by rangeland. After construction,
nearly all agricultural land along the ROW would be allowed to
return to production, and productivity is not expected to be reduced
significantly over the long term. Approximately 140 acres would be
necessary for construction of aboveground facilities; these acres
would be permanently removed from farming production. Recreational
lands potentially affected include bike trails, sightseeing areas,
hiking trails, and wildlife viewing areas; public lands are limited
along the ROW. Construction activities are anticipated to cause only
temporary impacts.

Land use changes associated with the portion of the REX pipeline that
is collocated with Keystone would cumulatively add to the acreage of
aboveground oil and gas facilities in the Project area. In addition,
the ethanol and coal-fired power plants that would be constructed
in Audrain County and Carroll County, Missouri, respectively, would
further increase the amount of land in those counties that would be
converted to industrial use

Keystone also has developed mitigation plans for limiting impacts on
soil drainage mechanisms, compaction, irrigation systems, farm access
areas, windbreaks and living fences, and Conservation Reserve Program
lands. Keystone has further sought to minimize impacts on rangelands
by developing range-specific mitigation measures. Keystone would
coordinate with agency and land use managers to reduce conflicts
between construction activities and recreational uses. Details on
these measures are provided in Appendix B.

**TABLE ES-5 (Continued)**

**Resource**

**Section Direct and Indirect Impacts Cumulative Impacts a Proposed
Mitigation Measures**

Socio economics

3.10 Construction. Pipeline construction activities would generate
substantial direct and indirect economic benefits. Potentially negative
impacts include agricultural losses, and increased demands on local
highways and emergency services. Some disruption of traffic flows
would be expected. Potentially adverse socioeconomic effects including
increased demand for public services and inexpensive housing could
disproportionately affect lower income areas. Other environmental
justice concerns, such as disproportionate air and water quality
impacts to communities, would not be expected.

Operations. The economic impacts of operating the pipeline are
expected to be positive, due to generation of permanent jobs and
increased property tax revenue.

Portions of the construction period and locations for the Keystone
Project and the collocated portion of the REX Project could overlap
due to delays or other issues. These projects, together with any
other linear and non-linear projects planned for the Project area,
would require workers to temporarily relocate to the Project area
during construction, potentially inducing housing shortages at certain
locations during certain periods of the construction schedule.

The increased tax revenue paid to the state and local governments over
the life of the projects also may result in a beneficial long-term
cumulative impact. Operation of the proposed facilities would require
relatively few permanent employees; thus, there would be no long- term
cumulative or additive impacts on population, housing, or municipal
services in the Project area.

Agricultural losses would be compensated by Keystone during the
easement procurement process, Keystone will maintaining access
and traffic flow on local roads during construction activities,
particularly for emergency vehicles. Any impacts on local roads would
be repaired by Keystone.

Cultural Resources

3.11 To limit impacts on cultural resources, the Keystone Project is
avoiding all cultural resources that are listed in or potentially
eligible for listing in the National Register of Historic Places
(NRHP). Short term construction-related impacts will be minimized
through implementation of Keystone's Mitigation Plan (Appendix
B). Inadvertent discoveries of buried cultural resources may occur.

No cumulative impacts to cultural resources are anticipated.

Keystone intends to avoid all cultural resources by rerouting the
pipeline corridor and/or related appurtenances, avoiding construction
activities on properties listed in or eligible for listing in the
NRHP, as well as boring and using HDD through culturally sterile
soils. Short-term, construction-related impacts will be mitigated
through implementation of Keystone's Mitigation Plan (Appendix
B). If any adverse effects do occur, they will be resolved through
consultation with the Advisory Council on Historic

**TABLE ES-5 (Continued)**

**Resource**

**Section Direct and Indirect Impacts Cumulative Impacts a Proposed
Mitigation Measures**

Preservation, as well as any applicable Native American tribes,
agencies, and the State Historic Preservation Officers. A Programmatic
Agreement also will be drafted to address the protocols for inadvertent
discoveries, future cultural resources identification and avoidance
commitments, and the process for future consultation.

Air 3.12 Construction. Because pipeline construction would move
through an area relatively quickly, air emissions typically would
be localized, intermittent, and short term. Because Keystone will
be required to comply with applicable regulations, emissions from
construction-related activities would not significantly affect local
or regional air quality.

Operations. Project operations would not produce significant air
quality impacts, and only minor emissions from the backup gasoline
generator and fugitive emissions from valves, tanks, and pumping
equipment would occur. Because operating emissions are expected to
be minimal, no operational permits would be required.

Should construction periods overlap, the proposed Keystone Project
would incrementally add to dust generation and combustion emissions
from heavy equipment that also would be produced by the other
reasonably foreseeable future projects discussed above.

On a local scale, cumulative increases in air emissions could
occur where new compressor or pump stations are located at or
near existing or proposed compressor stations, or other existing
industrial facilities. Pump stations for the Keystone Project also
could be located near a proposed ethanol plant in Audrain County,
Missouri and the proposed coal- fired power plant in Carroll County,
Missouri. Each pump or compressor station and ethanol or power plant
would be required to obtain state construction and operation permits,
and potential interactions with nearby emission sources would be
considered in these permit applications. Emissions from the facilities
would be reduced by best available technology.

Keystone's contractor shall at all times control airborne dust
levels during construction using water trucks, sprinklers or calcium
chloride as necessary to reduce dust to acceptable levels. Dust
shall be strictly controlled where the work approaches dwellings,
farm buildings, and other areas occupied by people and when the
pipeline parallels an existing road or highway.

Emissions from fugitive dust, construction equipment combustion,
open burning, and temporary fuel transfer systems and associated tanks
would be controlled to the extent required by state and local agencies,
through the permit process.

**TABLE ES-5 (Continued)**

**Resource**

**Section Direct and Indirect Impacts Cumulative Impacts a Proposed
Mitigation Measures**

Noise 3.12 Construction. Residential, agricultural, and commercial
areas within 500 feet of the project would experience short-term
inconvenience from construction equipment noise.

Operations. Noise associated with the electric pump stations would be
limited to the immediate vicinity of the facilities, and are projected
to be minor.

The Keystone Project, along with the other reasonably foreseeable
projects, would contribute to ambient noise levels during
construction. These noise impacts would be temporary and would
occur only during the construction period for each facility or linear
project. Because construction proceeds in sections along the pipelines
and linear projects, the duration of construction activities---and
therefore noise impacts---at any given location at any given time
would be limited and short term. Cumulative effects on ambient noise
levels would occur only if construction on a congruent section of
each project occurred simultaneously.

No new major sources of noise are expected during operation of the
Keystone facilities that would be near or collocated with facilities
associated with the other reasonably foreseeable projects.

Noise impacts from construction would be mitigated in accordance
with Keystone's Mitigation Plan (Appendix B) to reduce effects on
individuals, sensitive areas, and livestock. To limit disturbance
of residential and commercial areas within 500 feet of construction
activities by increased noise levels, Keystone would give advanced
notice to landowners prior to construction, limit the hours during
which construction activities with high- decibel noise levels are
conducted, and ensure that construction proceeds quickly through
such areas. Keystone would perform a noise assessment survey during
operations to confirm the level of noise at each listed noise-sensitive
area. Project-related operations therefore are not expected to result
in a significant effect on the noise environment.

Reliability and Safety

3.13 The reliability and safety of the Keystone Project can be expected
to be well within industry standards. Further, the low probability
of large, catastrophic spill events and the routing of the pipeline
to avoid most sensitive areas suggest a low probability of impacts
to human and natural resources. Nevertheless, some potential for
construction- and operation-related spills can be expected.

Keystone and similar crude oil pipeline projects are required to comply
with USDOT and state and local regulations regarding pipeline safety,
leak detection, and spill response. The Platte pipeline (which is
collocated with both the REX and Keystone Projects from the Nebraska/
Kansas border to Troy, Missouri and collocated with Keystone to Wood
River, Illinois) could contribute to cumulative effects should an
incident occur in relatively the same timeframe from each pipeline
or facility.

The Keystone pipeline system would be designed, constructed, and
maintained in a manner that meets or exceeds industry standards and
regulatory requirements. Details regarding Keystone's Spill Prevention
and Containment Plan are provided in Section 3.0 of Appendix B.

Keystone's preventative maintenance, inspection, and repair program
would monitor the integrity of the pipeline and make repairs if
necessary. In compliance with applicable regulations governing the
operation of pipelines, periodic inline inspections would be conducted
to collect

**TABLE ES-5 (Continued)**

**Resource**

**Section Direct and Indirect Impacts Cumulative Impacts a Proposed
Mitigation Measures**

information on the status of pipe for the entire length of the
system. In addition, line patrol, leak detection systems, SCADA,
fusion-bond epoxy coating, and construction techniques with associated
quality control would be implemented.

To mitigate the impacts of small spills and leaks, refueling of
construction equipment shall be conducted a minimum distance of 100
feet from the stream or a wetland.

a Cumulative impacts for each resource category are discussed in
Section 3.14 of the Draft EIS.

b Mitigation has been proposed by Keystone at the time of Draft
EIS publication and is summarized briefly in this table; additional
details and a comprehensive list of measures proposed by Keystone
are provided in Appendix B. Additional measures recommended by DOS
can be found in the appropriate Draft EIS section for the resource.

**ES.6.3 Water Resources**

Overall, it is not anticipated that surface water or groundwater
quality would be significantly affected by normal disposal activities
(such as disposal of hydrostatic test water), non-catastrophic spills,
or leaks during pipeline construction and operation. Hydrostatic
testing, which would involve the uptake and discharge of water,
should not cause any adverse impacts if Keystone's Construction,
Mitigation, and Reclamation Plan (CMR) (Appendix B) is followed.

Many of the aquifers present beneath, or in the vicinity of,
the proposed route are isolated by the presence of glacial till,
which characteristically inhibits downward migration of water
and contaminants into these aquifers. Although the pipeline has
been routed to avoid most near-surface aquifers, in several areas
shallow or near-surface aquifers are present beneath the proposed
route. For these areas, measures have been proposed (such as
containment structures) to reduce the potential impact of leaks and
spills during construction. Keystone's CMR Plan (Appendix B) outlines
procedures for contractor preparedness and emergency spill response
to reduce the potential for contaminants to migrate into the aquifer
during construction activities. Additionally, the risk of dewatering
shallow groundwater aquifers or reducing groundwater quality through
an increase in total suspended solids during construction likely
would be temporary, and these aquifers are expected to recover quickly
following construction activities. Construction and normal operations
therefore are not expected to result in a long-term significant impact
on groundwater.

Keystone has proposed three construction methods for crossing surface
water bodies: dry-cut methods, open cut wet crossings, and horizontal
directional drilling (HDD). The HDD method would avoid any impacts on
water bodies; however, the open cut wet method, involving trenching
while water continues to flow, would entail a high risk of temporary
siltation to streams and other water bodies. Dry-cut methods are not
feasible for wider streams. The risks of open-cut trenching could be
temporary (for the duration of construction) or longer term (where
compromised stream bank stability or bank erosion occurs). Keystone's
CMR Plan (Appendix B) includes several measures to reduce siltation
and erosion. Additional measures are recommended in the Draft EIS.

**ES.6.4 Wetlands**

Wetlands that would be affected within the ROW include emergent
wetlands (403 acres), forested wetlands (80 acres), perennial riverine
wetlands (37 acres), intermittent riverine wetlands (107 acres),
and scrub-shrub wetlands (32 acres). While emergent wetlands would
regenerate quickly after disturbance (within 3--5 years generally),
forested and scrub-shrub wetlands would potentially experience
long-term effects. Wetlands in parks or reserves have significant
conservation value. Keystone would implement mitigation measures
described in its CMR Plan, including restoration efforts in some
cases. As a result of this environmental analysis, Keystone has
committed to additional mitigation measures that would be included
in a revised CMR Plan prior to construction. Additional recommended
mitigation measures may be included in the specific permits issued
by relevant jurisdictional agencies or conservation easement holders
where applicable.

**ES.6.5 Terrestrial Vegetation**

Terrestrial vegetation classes include all the wetland classes in
addition to grasslands, upland forest, and developed land. Grassland
impacts due to pipeline construction are expected to be minimal, and
affected vegetative communities generally are expected to reestablish
within 2 years. Construction through 29 miles of previously untilled
prairie could produce irreversible impacts, as prairie sod can take up
to 100 years to recover. Keystone has identified several measures to
limit impacts on vegetation in its CMR Plan (Appendix B) As a result
of this environmental analysis, Keystone has committed to additional
mitigation measures that would be included in a revised CMR Plan prior
to construction. Additional recommended mitigation measures may be
included in the specific permits issued by relevant jurisdictional
agencies or conservation easement holders where applicable.

Impacts on upland forest and shrubland would be longer term than those
anticipated for grassland, because of the time required for these
plant communities to reestablish and reach mature, pre-construction
conditions.

**ES.6.6 Wildlife**

Pipeline construction would result in short-term disturbance and
long-term modification to wildlife habitats. Increased habitat
fragmentation would be experienced by white-tailed deer and other large
mammals. Although disturbance of dens during winter hibernation could
be potentially fatal for newborn black bears cubs, the probability of
this event is extremely low, as black bear habitat minimally overlaps
the ROW. Small game birds and rodents would be affected through
destruction of nests and burrows, death of young or loss of eggs,
and loss of foraging areas and cover. However, the total habitat loss
is expected to be small in the context of total available habitat.

**ES.6.7 Fisheries**

Possible impacts to fisheries could occur through siltation and
disturbance of streams crossed by the proposed pipeline. Following
the proposed mitigation procedures during construction would result
in minor short-term impacts to aquatic habitats and organisms. Any
short-term disturbance caused by instream activities likely would
resemble natural high-flow events in the stream. To mitigate impacts,
construction would involve dry-ditch techniques at crossings where the
timing of construction does not adequately protect environmentally
sensitive water bodies, as determined by the appropriate regulatory
authority.

In addition, Keystone has committed to using the HDD method at 17
designated major and sensitive water bodies (13 on the Mainline Project
and four on the Cushing Extension). As a result of this environmental
analysis, Keystone has agreed to prepare site specific crossing plans
for each major water body and for water body crossings where important
fisheries resources could be impacted that would not be crossed using
HDD. All stream crossings would require the review and approval of
the COE and other relevant agencies prior to construction.

Keystone has proposed to undertake hydrostatic testing during the
spring, summer, and autumn months, overlapping with key spawning
months of April to July. This overlap could affect some sensitive
species during breeding.

**ES.6.8 Threatened and Endangered Species**

Federally protected threatened or endangered species with the potential
to occur in the Keystone Project area include three birds, two mammals,
four fish, two mollusks, and three plants. Candidate species include
one reptile, one insect, and one fish. In addition to the federally
protected species described above, six of the seven states crossed by
the Keystone Project maintain state statutes and lists of endangered
and threatened animals and plants. Most affected habitat would include
croplands (13,594 acres) and grasslands (4,112 acres), followed by
wetlands and open water (845 acres), and upland and riparian forests
(1,078 acres). Loss of shrublands and wooded habitats would be long
term (5--20 years) in reclaimed areas of the construction ROW.

As discussed in detail in the EIS, potential impacts on individual
species include:

• Habitat loss, alteration, and fragmentation;

• Decreased breeding success due to disturbance from construction
and operations noise and increased human activity;

• Direct mortality from project construction and operation and/or
collision with or electrocution by power lines;

• Loss of individuals and habitats due to exposure to toxic materials
or crude oil releases (addressed in Section 3.13).

• Reduced survival or reproduction due to decreased abundance of
forage species;

• Interruption of foraging activities due to exposure to construction
and operations noise and increased human activity.

**ES.6.9 Land Use**

Agricultural, rangeland, forestland, recreational/special use,
commercial, and residential land use classes would be affected in
areas intersected by the proposed ROW. The largest amount of acreage
that would be affected by the Keystone Project would be agricultural
land, followed by rangeland.

Keystone is planning to undertake construction over an 18-month
period. During a short portion of that period while construction
is underway in a specific area, agricultural lands in that area
of the ROW would not be farmed. Keystone has agreed to compensate
landowners for crop and other losses on a case-by- case basis. Keystone
also has developed mitigation plans for limiting impacts on soil
drainage mechanisms, compaction, irrigation systems, farm access
areas, windbreaks and living fences, and Conservation Reserve
Program (CRP) lands. After construction, nearly all agricultural
land along the ROW would be allowed to return to production, and
productivity is not expected to be reduced significantly over the long
term. Approximately 140 acres would be necessary for construction of
aboveground facilities; these acres would be permanently removed from
farming production. Keystone has further sought to minimize impacts
on rangelands by developing range-specific mitigation measures.

Although it is unclear at present exactly how many CRP acres would
be affected by pipeline construction and operation, the Farm Service
Agency has estimated that, in a worst-case scenario, over 16,000
acres of CRP land would be affected during construction, with
over 6,500 acres remaining affected due to pipeline operation. It
is likely that total affected CRP acreage would be less than these
estimates. Impacts on CRP lands would include tilling of grasslands and
clearance and tillage of forested lands; if within the operational ROW,
these lands would not be allowed to regenerate during the life of the
Project. Keystone would restore all disturbed CRP lands in consultation
with the local FSA and NRCS offices. All CRP lands would therefore
remain eligible for continued enrollment in the programs. Should any
lands not be restored, such as forested CRP lands within the permanent
ROW or should a pump station be sited on CRP lands, Keystone would
compensate the landowners for demonstrated costs or lost revenue
associated with the CRP programs. Keystone would work with each
individual landowner where CRP lands are encountered, assisting
individuals to inform the local FSA and to develop restoration plans
to the satisfaction of the FSA and NRCS.

Thus, impacts on these lands would be localized but long term. Keystone
would address these impacts, and any impacts to Farmable Wetland
Program Lands and Wetlands Reserve Program lands, with NRCS and
landowners on a case-by-case basis. Overall impacts on residential and
commercial land uses are expected to be minor and would be addressed
by Keystone through landowner negotiations on a case-by- case basis
to ensure conservation values are mitigated.

Recreational lands potentially affected include bike trails,
sightseeing areas, hiking trails, and wildlife viewing areas;
public lands are limited along the ROW. Construction activities
are anticipated to cause only temporary impacts. Keystone would
coordinate with agency and land use managers to reduce conflicts
between construction activities and recreational uses.

**ES.6.10 Socioeconomics**

The proposed pipeline construction has the potential to generate
substantial direct and indirect economic benefits. Keystone is expected
to utilize temporary local construction labor where possible. Work
force demands would likely mean however that some non-local residents
would temporarily move into the area of influence. This would
translate into the need for additional housing units, rental units,
and or hotel rooms. Keystone estimates that, at the local level,
construction income benefits are expected to total from $28 to $48
million. Approximately 40 percent of the cost of construction goods
and services, or from $44 to $52 million, would be spent locally.

Potentially negative impacts include agricultural losses, which would
be compensated by Keystone during the easement procurement process, and
increased demands on local highways and emergency services. Keystone
does not anticipate any other increased public expenditures. Some
disruption of traffic flows would be expected; Keystone would use
public and preexisting private roads to access most of the ROW. Any
impacts on local roads would be repaired by Keystone.

The impacts of operating the pipeline are expected to be positive. The
cost of operational goods and services is estimated at $1.3 million
per year, plus an additional $46.5 million for electricity. About
90 percent of this ($43 million annually) would be spent locally in
the Project area. Approximately 26 permanent full-time jobs would be
associated with operation of the pipeline, representing an annual
payroll of $5.5 million. The project would generate additional
property tax revenues of approximately $46.7 million throughout the
Project area.

Agricultural losses along the pipeline corridor would likely be
relatively low; however, in a very unlikely "worst case" scenario, over
16,000 acres of CRP-enrolled lands could be affected. This scenario
assumes that all acreage enrolled in the program along the corridor
would be sufficiently affected that the land would need to be removed
from the program according to the rules of the CRP. In reality, the
actual acreage that would be removed is likely to be a fraction of the
overall enrolled acreage. Keystone has agreed to address the actual
economic impacts resulting from crossing CRP lands on a case-by-case
basis with the individuals potentially affected. In addition, as
part of the ROW procurement process, Keystone would negotiate with
the affected landowners to obtain an easement, compensating for any
losses, including potential decreases in property values.

Expansion of the Wood River Refinery in response to increased crude
oil deliveries from the Keystone pipeline is expected to generate
both positive and adverse socioeconomic effects. Expansion of the
Wood River Refinery is estimated to cost approximately $1 billion,
which likely would include expenditures on capital equipment, other
goods and materials, services, and labor. To the extent that these
expenditures are made in the local region, for example Madison County,
and industries are present to meet Project demands, the Project
would result in substantial regional economic benefits. Within an
input-output model framework, these benefits would include increases
in direct, indirect, and induced economic output; value added (i.e.,
labor income, other property income, and indirect business taxes);
and employment in the region.

In the long term, expansion of the Wood River Refinery would result
in greater refining capacity and increased production/output in the
refined petroleum industry. Based on an estimated 340,000 bpd in
increased crude oil shipments and an approximate crude oil contract
price of $60 per barrel, the estimatedProject*

value of refinery inputs is $20.4 million per day, or $744.6 million
annually. Other socioeconomic parameters that could be affected by
expansion of the Wood River Refinery include increases in fiscal
revenues and increased demands for public services and other local
resources.

Potentially adverse socioeconomic effects could occur---particularly
during construction---as a result of increased demand for a range
of public services, including law enforcement, fire protection,
and medical aid. This could disproportionately affect lower income
areas. Depending on the characteristics of the construction workforce,
demands may increase for short-term housing in the region, such as
hotels/motels and rental units, driving rents up and affecting lower
income or minority populations. Other environmental justice concerns,
such as disproportionate air and water quality impacts to communities,
would not be expected.

**ES.6.11 Cultural Resources**

A cultural resource is defined as any historic district, archeological
site, building, structure, or object that is either listed, or
eligible for listing, in the National Register of Historic Places
(NRHP). Cultural resources may also include traditional cultural
properties. Resource types that have been currently identified
within the Keystone Project APE include pre-contact and historic
archaeological sites, historic- era farmsteads, railroads, historic
trails, as well as historic cemeteries and pre-contact burial
sites. The principal types of adverse effects that could occur for
this project include physical destruction of or damage to all or part
of the property caused by pipeline trenching or related excavations or
boring, introduction of visual, atmospheric, or audible elements that
diminish the integrity of the property's significant historic features
by short term pipeline construction or construction of above-ground
appurtenant facilities and roads, and change of the character of the
property's use or of physical features within the property's setting
that contribute to its significance.

To mitigate impacts to cultural resources, the Keystone Project is
avoiding all cultural resources that are potentially eligible for
listing in the NRHP. Avoidance is achieved by rerouting the pipeline
corridor or related roadways, work spaces, and appurtenances; avoiding
construction activities on NRHP-eligible properties; and by boring or
using HDD beneath resources. Short term, construction-related impacts
will be mitigated by implementing measures in Keystone's CMR Plan
(Appendix B). If impacts do occur to any Eligible historic property
or Unevaluated cultural resource, they will be resolved through
consultation with all consulting parties, using the protocols that were
developed for this project and outlined in the Programmatic Agreement
(PA see Appendix R). The PA addresses unanticipated discoveries,
future historic properties identification and evaluation efforts,
avoidance commitments and measures, as well as the process for future
consultation.

DOS is in the process of consulting under Section 106 of the National
Historic Preservation Act (NHPA) with the SHPOs, Native American
tribes, and the ACHP to make final determinations of NRHP eligibility
and findings of effect for the cultural resources identified within the
Keystone area of potential effect. Monthly consultation meetings and
conference calls have been ongoing with interested agencies and tribes
to share information on the Project and to develop the PA (Appendix R).

**ES.6.12 Air Quality**

Two types of impacts on air quality were considered for this analysis:
temporary impacts resulting from emissions associated with construction
activities, and long-term or permanent impacts resulting from emissions
generated from continued operation of a stationary source.

Construction of the proposed Keystone Project would be similar
to other pipeline projects in terms of schedule, equipment used,
and types of activities. Because pipeline construction would move
through an area relatively quickly, air emissions typically would be
localized, intermittent, and short term. Emissions from fugitive dust,
construction equipment combustion, open burning, and temporary fuel
transfer systems and associated tanks would be controlled to the extent
required by state and local agencies, as explained above. Because
Keystone would be required to comply with applicable regulations,
emissions from construction-related activities would not significantly
affect local or regional air quality. Project operations would not
produce significant air quality impacts, and only minor emissions
from the backup gasoline generator and fugitive emissions from valves,
tanks, and pumping equipment would occur. Because operating emissions
are expected to be minimal, no operational permits would be required.

**ES.6.13 Noise**

Construction would increase noise levels in the vicinity of Project
activities; noise levels would vary during the construction period,
depending on the construction phase. Residential, agricultural,
and commercial areas within 500 feet of the Mainline Project and the
Cushing Extension ROW would experience short-term inconvenience from
construction equipment noise. Noise impacts from construction would
be mitigated in accordance with Keystone's CMR Plan (Appendix B)
to reduce effects on individuals, sensitive areas, and livestock. To
limit disturbance of residential and commercial areas within 500 feet
of construction activities by increased noise levels, Keystone would
give advanced notice to landowners prior to construction, limit the
hours during which construction activities with high- decibel noise
levels are conducted, and ensure that construction proceeds quickly
through such areas. Additional recommendations are summarized in
Section 5.12.2.

During operation of the pipeline, the noise associated with the
electric pump stations would be limited to the immediate vicinity of
the facilities. Although noise impacts from the electric pump stations
are projected to be minor, Keystone would perform a noise assessment
survey during operations to confirm the level of noise at each listed
noise-sensitive area. Project-related operations therefore are not
expected to result in a significant effect on the noise environment.

**ES.6.14 Reliability and Safety**

As discussed in this EIS, the most common spills from pipeline
construction and operations are the very small (< 5 bbl) and small
(5--49.9 bbl) spills of diesel, hydraulic fluid, transmission oil,
and antifreeze on work pads, roads, and facility parking or work
areas. Some small spills may result from slow and small leaks of
crude oil from the pipeline. Most of these small spills would not
reach non-facility land or water bodies. Significant (50--499.9 bbl)
and large (500--5,000 bbl) spills are much less common. Significant
spills are more likely to: (1) be caused by accidents at construction
and operation/maintenance sites; (2) be composed of refined products;
and (3) occur on or near roads, construction pads, facility sites,
or along the ROW.

Very large (>5,000 bbl) spills are a highly unlikely, but nonetheless
possible, event. They are likely to result from a major rupture or a
complete break in the pipeline and would release crude oil somewhere
along the ROW. Causes could include corrosion; major earth movement
resulting from slides, earthquakes, or flood flows eroding river
banks at non-HDD crossings; mechanical damage from excavation work;
or vandalism and terrorist actions. The actual volumes spilled could
vary, depending on the location and the activation methods and times
for valves, pressure in the line, actual location of the break,
the extent to which the pipeline follows the topographic contours
and presence of low spots in the pipeline, and other factors.

The Keystone pipeline system would be designed, constructed, and
maintained in a manner that meets or exceeds industry standards
and regulatory requirements. The proposed Keystone Project would be
built within an approved ROW. Signage would be installed at all road,
railway, and water crossings---

indicating that a pipeline is located in the area---to help prevent
third-party damage or impact to the pipeline. Keystone would
manage a crossing and encroachment approval system for all other
operators. Keystone would ensure safety near its facilities through a
combination of programs encompassing engineering design, construction,
and operations; public awareness and incident prevention programs;
and emergency response programs. Details regarding Keystone's Spill
Prevention and Containment Plan are provided in Section 3.0 of the
CMR Plan (Appendix B).

Keystone's preventative maintenance, inspection, and repair program
would monitor the integrity of the pipeline and make repairs if
necessary. Keystone is required to prepare an Integrity Management
Plan that would describe Keystone's Pipeline Maintenance Program
in detail. In compliance with applicable regulations governing the
operation of pipelines, periodic inline inspections would be conducted
to collect information on the status of pipe for the entire length
of the system. Additional types of information collected along the
pipeline would include cathodic protection readings, geotechnical
investigations, aerial patrol reports, and routine investigative
digs. In addition, line patrol, leak detection systems, SCADA,
fusion-bond epoxy coating, and construction techniques with associated
quality control would be implemented

The reliability and safety of the Keystone project if designed,
constructed, and operated as discussed herein would be well within
industry standards. The low probability of large, catastrophic
spill events and the routing of the pipeline to avoid most sensitive
areas suggest a low probability of long term impacts to human and
natural resources. Nevertheless, some potential for construction- and
operation- related spills can be expected. Commitments and procedures
described for reliability and safety in Appendices B and C are intended
to mitigate spill effects, particularly when considered in combination
with rapid and effective response and clean-up procedures.

**ES.6.15 Cumulative Impacts**

As defined in 40 CFR 1508.7, cumulative impacts are the incremental
impacts on the environment resulting from adding the proposed
action to other past, present, and reasonably foreseeable future
actions. Cumulative impacts were assessed by combining the potential
environmental impacts of the proposed action with the impacts of
projects that have occurred in the past, are currently occurring,
or are proposed in the future within the pipeline corridor or in the
vicinity of the pipeline ROW.

**ES.6.15.1 Past and Existing Projects**

Several existing pipelines transport natural gas liquids and compressed
natural gas across North Dakota, South Dakota, and Nebraska from
hubs in Montana to the west or Illinois to the east. The Williston
Basin Pipeline carries compressed natural gas and crosses through
the southern part of North Dakota, and a natural gas liquid pipeline
crosses the southeast corner of Nebraska and continues in a southwest
direction through Kansas. Portions of this pipeline may parallel the
Keystone Project but are likely to be well outside of the Keystone
Project ROW. In Oklahoma, Northern Natural Pipeline, NGPL of America,
Williams Natural, Duke Energy, Oklahoma Natural Gas, and the Lone Star
Gas Company all have lines that may parallel or intersect the Keystone
Project but are not necessarily collocated (Oil Week Magazine 2005).

The Express pipeline is an existing 24-inch-diameter pipeline that
interconnects with the Platte Pipeline, an existing 20-inch-diameter
pipe, at Casper, Wyoming. This 1,700-mile pipeline system transports
crude oil from Alberta's oil sands in Hardisty, Alberta to refineries
in the U.S. Rocky Mountain and Midwest regions. In the United States,
the pipeline crosses Montana, Wyoming, Nebraska, Kansas, and Missouri,
and terminates in Wood River, Illinois. The section known as the
Platte pipeline was built in 1952; theProject*

proposed Keystone Project would be collocated with the existing
Platte pipeline from the Nebraska/ Kansas border to the Wood River,
Illinois terminal.

Along the proposed Keystone Project corridor, multiple existing utility
corridors serve local and regional needs. For example, the WEB Water
Development Association provides high-quality water service to 7,728
rural hookups, 100 towns and bulk users, and five ethanol plants in
a 17-county service area, which includes 14 counties in South Dakota
and three counties in North Dakota. The Keystone Project would cross
WEB-owned PVC water pipelines at eight locations in Day and Clark
Counties South Dakota. In addition, numerous existing transportation
projects, such as interstate and state highways and railroads,
parallel or intersect the proposed Keystone pipeline ROW.

**ES.6.15.2 Reasonably Foreseeable Future Projects**

The Rockies Express Western Phase Project (REX Project) would include
construction and operation of approximately 795.7 miles of natural gas
pipeline that would transport natural gas from the Cheyenne Hub in
Colorado to its terminus at the Panhandle Eastern Pipe Line Company
interconnect in Audrain County, Missouri. A portion of the proposed
REX pipeline would parallel the Keystone pipeline from the Nebraska/
Kansas border to Troy, Missouri (approximately 280 miles).

The REX Project proposes to construct the Turney Compressor Station,
a large aboveground facility near Plattsburg in Clinton County,
Missouri that is up to several miles east of the proposed location
for Keystone's Pump Station 31, and a compressor station near Steele
City Gage County, Nebraska that is along the ROW for the Keystone
Mainline Project.

Enbridge is proposing three expansion projects to help address
current and future increases in refinery demand as supply from the
WCSB increases. The Southern Access, is an expansion and extension
of Enbridge's existing pipeline system, including new pipeline in
Wisconsin and Illinois; the Southern Lights is a crude oil pipeline
from the U.S. -- Canada border at Cavalier County, North Dakota,
to Clearbrook, Minnesota; and the Alberta Clipper is a new crude oil
pipeline from Alberta to Superior, Wisconsin. As presently planned,
these pipelines would cross Minnesota and part of Wisconsin. The
sections supplying Cushing, Oklahoma and Wood River, Illinois do not
appear to be collocated with the proposed Keystone Project ROW. The
applicability of these projects as System Alternatives for the Keystone
Project is discussed in Section ES.5.2.

Proposed non linear-projects collocated with the Keystone Project
and the REX pipeline in Missouri include an ethanol plant in Audrain
County (unknown completion date), and a coal-fired power plant in
Carroll County (anticipated completion in 2013).

**ES.6.15.3 Cumulative Impacts**

**Geology, Soils, and Sediments**

Construction of the REX pipeline and the Keystone Project would
require the commitment of granular borrow resources from areas along
the pipeline corridors and areas near appurtenant facilities for the
lifetime of the pipelines and related facilities. In addition, these
projects and the proposed ethanol plant could result in a cumulative
impact on clay pits in Audrain County, Missouri. Given the limited
areal extent of the Keystone Project in comparison to the potential
mineral extraction areas along the corridor, construction of the
Keystone Project is not likely to result in cumulative impacts that
would affect future exploitation of mineral resources in that area.

Along with construction of pipelines, roads, and other
surface-disturbing activities, construction of the Keystone Project
could contribute to the cumulative exposure and potential loss of
scientifically valuablestone Pipeline Project*

fossils in the project area. However, should Keystone prepare and
follow a Paleontological Resources Protection Plan, significant fossil
resources that may be encountered during Project construction would be
identified and protected, thereby ensuring that the Keystone Project
would not contribute to cumulative effects on these resources.

Potential cumulative erosion effects could occur where construction
disturbance areas overlap, or are located near each other,
particularly along the sections of Keystone pipeline that are
collocated with REX. However, the existing pipelines, utility,
and roadway projects have been installed for a number of years and
the construction ROWs have been partially or completely restored
to pre-existing conditions. Irrigated hayfields and pasturelands
have returned to their prior uses. Both the REX Project and the
Keystone Project would apply best management practices (BMPs) for
soil management and protection to the pipelines and appurtenant
facilities. Revegetation mixtures that are appropriate to soil
conditions and expected future uses (such as grazing and wildlife
habitat) would be applied to the disturbed areas. Consequently, the
potential for cumulative erosion effects caused by one or more of
these projects is low because consistent erosion control practices
would be applied, and structural erosion control measures would be
integrated between and among adjacent projects

**Water Resources**

Groundwater potentially would be used for Keystone, REX, and other
collocated or nearby construction projects to control dust generated
and for other uses during construction. Keystone does not propose to
use groundwater for hydrostatic testing; however, groundwater could be
used for hydrostatic testing for certain portions of the REX Project
(FERC 2006). In addition, contaminant spills during construction
could occur from any project in the cumulative impact study area
during construction or operation. Each project would be required to
implement spill containment and control plans as required by federal
and state agencies. No additional cumulative impacts on groundwater
volume or quality from the Keystone Project are expected.

Impacts due to crossing of surface waters by linear projects,
such as highways and pipelines, are generally localized and short
term. However, if construction activities of the Keystone Project
and the collocated portion of REX pipeline follow a similar schedule,
there could be a cumulative contribution to incremental sedimentation
in adjacent surface waters. At present, the project schedules show
construction of the two projects separated by at least a year. In
addition, each project---as well as any other collocated construction
projects---would be required to follow BMPs and permit conditions to
protect surface waters.

Both the Keystone Project and other portions of the REX Project plan to
use surface water for hydrostatic testing. However the timing for REX
withdrawals would not overlap with withdrawals planned for Keystone;
therefore, cumulative effects on surface water or groundwater due to
hydrostatic test water withdrawals would not occur.

**Wetlands**

Cumulative impacts on wetlands would occur in locations where any of
the Keystone Project and REX pipelines or other construction projects
would be collocated while crossing wetlands. A portion of the REX
Project would be collocated with the Keystone pipeline for about
280 miles. Within the Keystone Project pipeline collocation, the REX
pipeline would disturb a total of 77.5 acres of wetlands (55.0 acres of
forested wetland, 1.3 acres of scrub-shrub wetlands, and 21.2 acres of
wet meadow and marsh) (FERC 2006). Should the Keystone pipeline affect
the same or similar wetland habitats within the collocated area, but
within its respective construction ROW, total wetland impacts within
the collocated area could be 156.0 acres of wetlands. Both projects
would follow mitigation measures to protect wetlands. In the case of
REX, the FERC Procedures would apply. Other construction projects,
such as town expansions, new roads and highways, and other industrial
facilities---both within the section of the Keystone Project that is
collocated with REX, and in other areas along the Mainline Project
and Cushing Extension---could affect additional wetlands. However,
applicants for any projects that would place fill in waters of the
United States would be subject to conditions in the U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers' Section 404 permits and to state and local water quality
permits. None of the wetlands crossed by the Keystone Project would
be permanently filled or drained. Long-term impacts would occur to
forested and scrub-shrub wetlands which would be maintained in a
herbaceous state. The Keystone Project would use best management
practices to avoid and minimize impacts to wetlands and would be
required to mitigate unavoidable impacts to jurisdictional wetlands
as determined through the Section 404 process and other relevant
permitting procedures.

**Terrestrial Vegetation and Wildlife**

The total amount of native vegetation and wildlife habitat that may
be affected by all of the reasonably foreseeable projects, including
the Keystone Project, is relatively small because the projects cross
primarily previously tilled agricultural lands. Impacts resulting
from construction of the pipelines and other linear and non-linear
projects would result in the long-term and permanent loss of trees
and shrubs and would cause incremental increases in habitat loss and
fragmentation of forested areas. The effects of habitat fragmentation
would be reduced by collocation of the linear projects with existing
and proposed ROWs where they are located away from large areas of
intact forested habitats. Habitat fragmentation would be exacerbated
where ROWs are collocated across large areas of intact forested
habitats. All of the projects would implement mitigation measures
designed to minimize the potential for erosion, revegetate disturbed
areas, increase the stabilization of site conditions, and control the
spread of noxious weeds--- thereby minimizing the degree and duration
of the cumulative impact on vegetation from these projects.

Construction and operation of pumping stations for Keystone and
compressor stations for REX also would permanently affect vegetation
and wildlife habitat. Keystone would require a total of about 61
acres of land along the Mainline Project (for aboveground facilities,
including pump stations, delivery facilities, and mainline valves) and
about 13 acres for similar facilities along the Cushing Extension. The
two compressor stations for the portion of REX that is collocated
with the Keystone Project each would affect about 13 acres.

Construction and operation of the Keystone Project, along with the
reasonably foreseeable projects, would result in short-term disturbance
to wildlife and long-term wildlife habitat modification. Keystone
would incrementally add to the area of habitat disrupted and to the
disturbance of resident and migrating species, causing associated
impacts on these species as they adjust to the changes brought about by
the proposed projects. Increased movement or displacement of species
dependent on the disturbed habitats could reduce carrying capacities,
reproductive effort, or survival. This potential is greater for
species for which suitable habitat is limited in the Project area or
that are otherwise sensitive to disturbance.

Removal of woodlands and shrublands would result in a long-term
reduction of wildlife habitat because the regeneration of woody species
is typically slow in the Project region. However, most of the Project
area consists of relatively open fields or is presently used for
agricultural purposes. Habitat types potentially crossed or affected
are widely available for wildlife use outside of the immediate area
of disturbance. In addition, each proposed project would be required
to follow appropriate mitigation measures to minimize impacts or
compensate for unavoidable impacts on wildlife.

**Fisheries**

Stream channel disturbance and hydrostatic test water withdrawals from
water bodies in Kansas and Missouri would occur during the Keystone
Project, including in areas where the REX pipeline would parallel
the Keystone pipeline. Because construction schedules for the REX
pipeline and the other non- linear projects are different from the
Keystone Project, cumulative impacts on fisheries would not occur. If
construction of facilities or other projects does become concurrent
due to schedule changes, the Keystone Project would contribute
to cumulative sedimentation impacts on fisheries. Nevertheless,
these impacts would be short term and minor due to implementation
of mitigation measures and the requirements of any individual state
permits to minimize impacts while crossing water bodies.

**Threatened and Endangered Species**

Because the Keystone pipeline would parallel the REX pipeline across
Kansas and Missouri, many of the state and federally listed threatened
and endangered species could potentially be affected by construction
and operation of these projects. Each project is required to consult
with federal, state, and local agencies to determine which species may
occur within each individual project area; evaluate potential impacts
on those species during construction and operation; and implement
measures to avoid, minimize, or mitigate impacts on special-status
species and their habitats. Because all applicants would be required to
restore their respective construction ROWs and follow all applicable
laws and regulations regarding special- status species and habitats,
the contribution of the Keystone Project to cumulative impacts on
special- status species and their habitats would not be significant.

**Land Use, Recreation and Special Interest Areas, and Visual
Resources**

New land requirements for construction and operation of the aboveground
facilities for the Keystone pipeline would involve acquisition of
about 109 acres of land along the Mainline Project and 18 acres for
similar facilities along the Cushing Extension. Land use changes
associated with the collocated portion of the REX pipeline would
cumulatively add to the acreage of aboveground oil and gas facilities
in the Project area. In addition, the ethanol and coal-fired power
plants that would be constructed in Audrain County and Carroll County,
Missouri, respectively, would further increase the amount of land in
those counties that would be converted to industrial use.

Recreation and special interest areas to the west of Troy, Missouri
that would be crossed by the Keystone pipeline also would be
potentially affected by the REX pipeline. This includes a number of
conservation and hunting areas that are either privately or publicly
owned. Recreational uses of these areas could be temporarily affected
during construction activities for the pipelines. Mitigation measures
created to protect the conservation area and parks would minimize
the contribution of Keystone to recreational impacts.

A significant contribution to cumulative effects on visual resources
from the Keystone Project is not expected due to collocation with
other linear projects, restoration of the ROW, and the lack of
sensitive visual resource areas that would be crossed. The majority
of aboveground facilities associated with both the Keystone and
REX Projects would be located in agricultural or rangeland areas,
or adjacent to existing industrial facilities. In addition, the new
aboveground facilities associated with the projects would be limited in
number and widely distributed. Mitigation measures such as screening
with vegetation and use of non-reflective paints that are similar in
color to the surrounding terrain would help to minimize visual impacts.

Overall, the Keystone Project would contribute to cumulative impacts
on agricultural land use and farming practices and on recreation
and visual resources along the extent of the proposed ROW. While
construction of new pipelines parallel to existing corridors would
incrementally reduce the area available for future development, use
of established utility corridors would concentrate the cumulative
land use and other impacts into a less extensive area.

**Socioeconomics**

Portions of the construction period and locations for the Keystone
Project and the collocated portion of the REX Project could overlap
due to delays or other issues. These projects, together with any
other linear and non-linear projects planned for the Project area,
would require workers to temporarily relocate to the Project area
during construction, potentially inducing housing shortages at certain
locations during certain periods of the construction schedule. Workers
would be dispersed over the entire length of the pipeline route and
throughout the counties and states crossed by the pipelines. Based
on the review of the information regarding availability of local
rental housing for both projects, the combined number of non- local
workers may exceed the available housing in a given area. However, the
preference of most workers likely would be short-term accommodations,
primarily in hotels and motels that would be found in the more
populated, service-oriented communities located within a reasonable
commuting distance from the work site.

During construction of the Keystone Project, expenditures for payroll,
local purchases, and related tax revenues would provide a short-term
beneficial impact to the affected counties. Similar benefits are likely
to be associated with the REX Project and any other non-linear or
industrial projects. The increased tax revenue paid to the state and
local governments over the life of the projects also may result in
a beneficial long-term cumulative impact. Operation of the proposed
facilities would require relatively few permanent employees; thus,
there would be no long-term cumulative or additive impacts on
population, housing, or municipal services in the Project area.

**Cultural Resources**

To date, the REX Project surveys have identified nine potential
historic properties in Nebraska, Kansas, and Missouri that may also be
in the vicinity of the Keystone Project. Federally regulated projects
such as Keystone and REX are required to conduct cultural resources
surveys and identify historic properties that may be affected by those
projects. In accordance with 36 CFR 800, the ACHP's regulations for
implementing Section 106 of the NHPA, the lead federal agencies
for those projects would consult with the appropriate SHPOs,
Native American tribes, and other consulting parties, and would
mitigate impacts on any historic properties that may be adversely
affected. Other potential non-federal actions in the Project area would
be required to comply with any identification procedures and mitigation
measures required by the state where the action is proposed. Therefore,
no cumulative impacts on cultural resources are expected. Keystone
has mitigated possible effects on potentially eligible cultural and
historical properties through avoidance wherever possible. As a result
of collocation with existing disturbed alignments for substantial
distances along the proposed ROW and avoidance of potentially eligible
properties wherever possible, the incremental impact of the Keystone
Project to cultural resources is minor.

**Air Quality**

Should construction periods overlap, the proposed Keystone Project
would incrementally add to dust generation and combustion emissions
from heavy equipment that also would be produced by the other
reasonably foreseeable future projects discussed above. Cumulative
fugitive dust (particulate) increases could occur where the REX,
Keystone, and other non-linear construction projects use the same
access road systems.

On a local scale, cumulative increases in air emissions could
occur where new compressor or pump stations are located at or
near existing or proposed compressor stations, or other existing
industrial facilities. Depending on the final locations for pump
stations for the Keystone Project, facilities also could be located
near a proposed ethanol plant in Audrain County, Missouri and the
proposed coal-fired power plant in Carroll County, Missouri. Each pump
or compressor station and ethanol or power plant would be required
to obtain state construction and operation permits, and potential
interactions with nearby emission sources would be considered in
these permit applications. Emissions from the facilities would be
reduced by best available technology.

The majority of the potential cumulative construction and operational
effects on air quality due to the Keystone Project would be negligible
because of the large geographical area over which the various existing
and reasonably foreseeable projects are located, and the fact that
these projects likely would be constructed over varying periods.

The Keystone Project, along with the projects discussed above, would
contribute to ambient noise levels during construction. Construction
noise impacts would be temporary and would occur only during the
construction period for each facility or linear project. Because
construction proceeds in sections along the pipelines and linear
projects, the duration of construction activities---and therefore
noise impacts---at any given location at any given time would be
limited and short term. Cumulative effects on ambient noise levels
would occur only if construction on a congruent section of each
project occurred simultaneously.

No new major sources of noise are expected during operation of the
Keystone facilities that would be near or collocated with facilities
associated with the other reasonably foreseeable projects. Noise
levels resulting from operation of the pump stations for Keystone
and the meter and regulator facilities for REX would be minimal or
not noticeable, as the proposed facilities would be located in areas
of low population density. Consequently, no cumulative impacts are
expected. Based on a review of available information, it appears
that Keystone's Pump Station 31 could be located up to several miles
west of REX's proposed Turney Compressor Station in Clinton County,
Missouri. Taking into account the geographical locations of the two
stations, the noise data available, and preliminary calculations,
Keystone's contribution to cumulative noise impacts during operations
would not be significant.

**Reliability and Safety**

Landowners have expressed concerns about the safety of collocating
multiple pipelines in a common corridor across their property. As
described in this Draft EIS, Keystone is required to comply with
USDOT and state and local regulations regarding pipeline safety, leak
detection, and spill response. Because the REX Project will transport
natural gas rather than any type of liquid material, cumulative effects
caused by spills and leaks of crude oil are not expected from the two
collocated pipelines. The Platte pipeline (which is collocated with
both the REX and Keystone Projects from the Nebraska/Kansas border to
Troy, Missouri and collocated with Keystone to Wood River, Illinois)
could contribute to cumulative effects should an incident occur in
relatively the same time frame from the Keystone pipeline and from one
or several of the other pipelines or facilities. Large release events
are rare however and therefore the likelihood of an event occurring in
the same general area within two separate pipeline systems is remote.

**Greenhouse Gases and Global Warming**

In attempting to meet the purpose and need for the Keystone Project,
construction and operation of the proposed Project would incrementally
increase the cumulative impact of greenhouse gas emissions. The
carbon emissions associated with construction and operation would
occur irrespective of the routing of the pipeline. However, the
ultimate construction and operation of the pipeline would offset
potential emissions associated with other methodologies for meeting
the demand for imported crude oil, such as delivery of crude oil by
tanker from alternative international sources. Keystone has committed
to restoration and replanting of vegetative cover along the proposed
pipeline corridor to the extent compatible with safety and operational
requirements. This commitment would allow any advantages associated
with carbon sinks along the proposed corridor to be reestablished
after temporary disruption during the construction phase. Therefore,
the incremental contribution to greenhouse gas emissions associated
with construction and operation of the proposed Keystone is likely
to be relatively small compared to the nationwide production of
greenhouse gases on an annual basis.

**ES.6.16 Conclusions**

The analysis presented in this EIS is based on information provided in
ten filings by TransCanada and was further developed from three data
requests; public and agency scoping; literature research; alternatives
analysis; and contacts with federal, state, and local agencies. Based
on the information provided in Section 3.0 of this Final EIS for each
resource category, DOS concludes that the proposed Keystone Mainline
Project and Cushing Extension, if designed, constructed, and operated
in accordance with the Project Description in Section 2.0 of this Final
EIS as amended by additional approaches and mitigations agreed to by
Keystone as a result of this environmental analysis and as further
amended by specific permit conditions to be assigned by the state and
federal agencies with permit jurisdiction along the pipeline corridor
would result in limited adverse environmental impacts.