**ES.0 EXECUTIVE SUMMARY**

**ES.1 INTRODUCTION**

TransCanada Keystone Pipeline, LP (Keystone) has applied to the
U.S. Department of State (DOS) for a

Presidential Permit for the proposed construction, connection,
operation, and maintenance of a pipeline and associated facilities at
the United States border for importation of crude oil from Canada. DOS

receives and considers applications for Presidential Permits for such
oil pipeline border crossings and associated facilities pursuant to
the President's constitutional authority over foreign relations, and as

Commander-in-Chief, which authority the President delegated to DOS
in Executive Order (EO) 13337, as amended (69 Federal Register [FR]
25299). DOS's jurisdiction to issue a Presidential Permit for the
border crossing and the associated facilities at the border.

DOS, as the lead agency for the environmental impact statement (EIS),
discussed the appropriate level of participation required with other
federal agencies that will be required to issue permits associated with
the proposed Keystone XL Pipeline Project (Project). The following
federal agencies and one state agency have elected to participate as
cooperating agencies in the process:

• U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)

• U.S. Department of the Interior, Bureau of Land Management (BLM)

• U.S. Department of the Interior, National Park Service (NPS)

• U.S. Department of the Interior, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
(USFWS)

• U.S. Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation
Service (NRCS)

• U.S. Department of Agriculture, Farm Service Agency (FSA)

• U.S. Department of Agriculture, Rural Utilities Service (RUS)

• U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE)

• U.S. Department of Energy, Western Area Power Administration
(Western)

• U.S. Department of Transportation, Pipeline and Hazardous Materials
Safety Administration

(PHMSA), Office of Pipeline Safety (OPS)

• Montana Department of Environmental Quality (MDEQ)

The U.S. Department of Interior, Bureau of Reclamation (Reclamation)
has agreed to provide technical assistance to DOS in the environmental
review process. Reclamation has responsibilities for federal water
supplies in the West. The proposed pipeline would cross beneath one
of Reclamation's canals in

South Dakota.

Certain county governments in Nebraska have agreed to be assisting
agencies, and as such would work with DOS to ensure that the EIS
incorporates local planning processes and/or laws. These counties are:

Fillmore, Greely, Holt, Merrick, Nance, Saline, and Wheeler. In
Nebraska, the Lower Big Blue Natural

Resources district and the Upper Elkhorn Natural Resources district
have also agreed to be assisting agencies. Various other state and
local resource agencies from each of the states crossed by the proposed

Project have responsibilities for state and local permit issuance
(see Table 1.8-1).

**ES.2 PROPOSED ACTION**

The Project would consist of approximately 1,380 miles of new
36-inch-diameter pipeline in the U.S.

The proposed pipeline would cross the international border between
Saskatchewan, Canada and the

United States near Morgan, Montana. The Project initially would have
the nominal transport capacity of

700,000 barrels per day (bpd) of crude oil, with up to 200,000 bpd
delivered to an existing terminal in

Cushing, Oklahoma and the remaining amount shipped to existing delivery
points in Nederland (near Port

Arthur), Texas, and Moore Junction (in Harris County), Texas. By
increasing the pumping capacity in the future, the Project could
ultimately transport up to 900,000 bpd of crude oil through the
proposed pipeline. At that throughput, up to 200,000 bpd would be
delivered to the Cushing Oil Terminal and the remainder would be
delivered to the existing terminals in Texas.

**ES.2.1 Pipeline System**

The Project includes three new pipeline segments plus additional
pumping capacity on the previously permitted Cushing Extension Segment
of the Keystone Pipeline Project (Keystone Cushing Extension):

• Steele City Segment (from Morgan, Montana to Steele City, Nebraska)
that connects to the northern end of the previously approved, and
currently under construction, Keystone Cushing

• Gulf Coast Segment (from Cushing, Oklahoma to Nederland, Texas)
that connects to the southern end of the Keystone Cushing Extension;
and

• Houston Lateral (from the Gulf Coast Segment, in Liberty County,
Texas to Moore Junction, in

Harris County, Texas).

Table ES.2.1-1 lists the miles of new pipeline by state for the
proposed Keystone XL Project.

**TABLE ES.2.1-1 Miles of Pipeline by State for the Proposed Project**

**MT SD NE OK TX Total**

Steele City Segment 282.5 314.1 254.1 0.0 0.0 850.7

Gulf Coast Segment 0.0 0.0 0.0 155.4 324.8 480.2

Houston Lateral 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 48.6 48.6

**Project total 282.5** **314.1** **254.1** **155.4 373.4 1,379.5**

The Project components would include 30 new pump stations, 74 mainline
valves (MLVs), approximately

50 permanent access roads, one tank farm, and two crude oil delivery
sites. Additional access roads,

stockpile sites, railroad sidings and construction camps would be
required during Project construction.

The pipeline would require a 110-foot wide construction right-of-way
(ROW), consisting of a 60-foot temporary easement and a 50-foot
permanent easement. In certain sensitive areas, which may include
wetlands, cultural sites, shelterbelts, residential areas, or
commercial/industrial areas, the construction

ROW would be reduced to 85 feet.

**ES.2.2 Connected Actions**

Pump stations, remotely operated valves and densitometers1 for
the Project would be electrically powered. The necessary electric
power lines and associated facility upgrades would be constructed
by local electrical service companies to provide power for these
facilities. Those companies would be responsible for obtaining the
necessary approvals or authorizations from federal, state, and local
agencies for such facilities. Although the permitting process for
the electrical facilities is an independent process,

construction and operation of these facilities are considered connected
actions under NEPA and were evaluated as part of the NEPA review
process reported in this EIS. Additionally, Western has determined
that due to load forecasts associated with proposed pump stations in
South Dakota, a new 230-kV

transmission line would need to be added to the existing electrical
grid system; as a result Western has proposed construction and
operation of the 80-mile-long Lower Brule to Witten transmission
line. Two potential corridors and several route options within each
of those corridors were identified for the transmission line; the
potential impacts of construction and operation of the transmission
line are generally addressed in this EIS. An additional and separate
NEPA environmental assessment of the alternatives for the proposed
transmission line will be conducted in the future.

**ES.3 PURPOSE AND NEED FOR THE PROPOSED ACTION**

The primary purpose of the proposed Project is to transport Western
Canadian Sedimentary Basin

(WCSB) crude oil from the border with Canada to existing delivery
points in Petroleum Administration for Defense District (PADD) III2
that provide connections to existing refineries in PADD III. An
additional purpose of the Project is to supplement WCSB deliveries
to the Cushing Oil Terminal in

Cushing, Oklahoma, which is in PADD II3. Keystone's goal is to
initially transport up to 700,000 bpd of crude oil by pipeline from
the WCSB to the United States. Up to 500,000 bpd of this volume
of crude oil would be transported to delivery points in PADD III
and up to 200,000 bpd would be transported to the existing Cushing
Oil Terminal. At maximum capacity (achieved with the addition of
supplementary pumping power) the Project would have the potential
to transport a total of 900,000 bpd of WCSB crude oil to the U.S.,
with the additional 200,000 bpd transported to delivery points in
PADD III. Due to market projections of future fuel demand in PADD
III, the applicant does not currently anticipate the need to expand
capacity to 900,000 bpd in the near future.

The need for the Project is dictated by:

• Supply of heavy crude oil from the WCSB;

• Demand for heavy crude oil in PADD III;

• Transport of crude oil from the WCSB to PADD III; and

• Future crude oil supply and demand scenarios with and without
the proposed Project.

**ES.4 PUBLIC INVOLVEMENT PROCESS**

On January 28, 2009, DOS issued a Notice of Intent (NOI) to prepare an
EIS. The NOI informed the public about the proposed action, announced
plans for scoping meetings, invited public participation in the
scoping process, and solicited public comments for consideration in
establishing the scope and content of the EIS. The NOI was published
in the Federal Register and distributed to affected landowners, federal

1 Densitometers measure the batch density of the crude oil to allow
operators to track individual crude oil shipments. 2 PADD III (Gulf
Coast) consists of the states of Alabama, Mississippi, Louisiana,
Arkansas, Texas, and New

Mexico. 3 PADD II (MidWest) consists of 15 states from Oklahoma north
to Wisconsin and east to Ohio.

agencies, Indian tribes, state agencies, municipalities and counties,
elected officials, non-governmental organizations, the media, and
other interested individuals. DOS held 20 separate scoping meetings
in the vicinity of the proposed Project to provide opportunity for
public comment on the scope of the EIS.

Meetings were held in Beaumont, Liberty, Livingston, and Tyler, Texas;
Durant and Ponca City,

Oklahoma; El Dorado and Clay Center, Kansas; York and Atkinson,
Nebraska; Murdo, Faith, and

Buffalo, South Dakota; Baker, Terry, Circle, Plentywood, Glendive
Glasgow, and Malta, Montana. The scoping period was originally planned
to extend from January 28 to March 16, 2009. Weather conditions in
South Dakota precluded holding the scoping meetings on this schedule,
and an amended NOI

published on March 23, 2009 extended the scoping period until April 15,
2009 to provide time to reschedule two South Dakota scoping meetings.

DOS received verbal, written, and electronic comments during
the scoping comment period. All verbal scoping comments formally
presented at the meetings were recorded and transcribed. Additional
written scoping comments were received on comment forms provided to
the public at the meetings and in letters.

**ES.5 ALTERNATIVES CONSIDERED**

The following alternatives were assessed by DOS:

• No Action Alternative − the proposed Project would not be built;

• System Alternatives − use of other pipeline systems or other
methods of providing crude oil supplies to the U.S. Gulf Coast market;

• Major Route Alternatives − other pipeline routes for transporting
crude oil from the U.S./Canada border near Morgan, Montana to the
Port Arthur and the east Houston areas of Texas; and

• Alternative Routes for the Electrical Transmission Line −
preliminary alternative routings for the proposed 230-kV transmission
line in South Dakota that is needed to ensure power system stability
given the loads required for providing electrical power to the pump
stations in South

In addition, MDEQ evaluated alternatives and variations in Montana
as part of its analysis of Keystone's application for a Certificate
of Compliance under the state's Major Facility Siting Act (MFSA). MDEQ

also evaluated the alternatives and variations in accordance with
the requirements of the Montana

Environmental Policy Act (MEPA) as reported in Appendix I of the EIS.

**ES.5.1 No Action Alternative**

Under the No Action Alternative, the Project would not be constructed
and would not require issuance of a DOS Presidential Permit. The
increasing demand for crude oil in the U.S. cannot be entirely met by
efforts to conserve use of refined petroleum products or the increased
use of renewable energy. As crude oil demand increases, the overall
domestic supplies of crude oil are declining. At the same time, only
a small volume of WCSB crude oil can be shipped to PADD III through a
single pipeline, and a substantial portion of the oil imported from
outside of North America originates in countries with decreasing or
undependable oil supplies. Under the No Action Alternative, it is
likely that other projects would be proposed to meet the increased
demand. Although it is not possible to identify the specific impacts
of such projects, it is likely that they would be similar in nature
to those of the proposed Project and either smaller, greater than,
or equal to the magnitude of impacts of the proposed Project.

Under the No Action Alternative, the U.S. would not receive a reliable
and cost efficient source of crude oil from the WSCB region and would
remain dependent upon unstable foreign oil supplies from the

Mideast, Africa, Mexico, and South America. Further, the WCSB crude
oil would likely be shipped to
countries outside of North America, which would require new
infrastructure that would result in environmental impacts at least as
great as those of the proposed Project. In addition, the transport
of crude oil by tanker and other means such as truck and rail would
likely result in greater GHG emissions than those that would occur as
a result of the proposed Project. Finally, the No Action Alternative
would not meet the purpose and need of the proposed Project.

**ES.5.2 System Alternatives**

System alternatives to the proposed Project would make use of
other existing, modified, or proposed pipeline systems as well as
non-pipeline systems - to meet the purpose and need of the proposed
Project.

**ES.5.2.1 Existing Pipeline Systems**

There is currently only one existing pipeline system that extends
from the Midwest to the Gulf region.

The ExxonMobil Pegasus pipeline is a system that transports crude
oil from Patoka, Illinois to Nederland,

Texas. Since the committed pipeline capacity is 50,000 bpd and the
total capacity is 66,000 bpd, Pegasus is considering an expansion of
up to 30,000 bpd to PADD III as early as 2009. Even with the proposed
expansion, the Exxon Pegasus proposal would not meet the service
capacity needs of the PADD III

**ES.5.2.2 New Pipeline System Alternatives**

Four alternative new proposed pipeline system alternatives were
analyzed: The Altex Pipeline System;

The Chinook-Maple Leaf Pipeline System; Trailbreaker Transportation
System; and the Enbridge -- BP

Delivery System all of which at this time are speculative. None of
the proposed system alternatives would provide the delivery capacity
of the proposed Project and none could provide WCSB crude oil to

PADD III in the same timeframe as the proposed Project. Therefore,
none of the system alternatives considered can meet the Project
purpose and need and none of them offer a significant environmental

**ES.5.2.3 Alternative Modes of Transportation**

Surface crude oil delivery transportation modes from the U.S./Canada
border near Morgan, Montana to the Port Arthur and the east Houston
areas of Texas were considered as an alternative to the proposed

Project. Modes considered include delivery by truck, railroad cars,
and barges. Truck transportation would not be a practical way to meet
the Project's purpose and need since crude oil transport equivalent to
that of the proposed Project would require 4,000 trucks per day. There
is not an existing direct rail line from Morgan, Montana, to Port
Arthur, Texas and the east Houston areas of Texas. Barging the oil
would not be feasible due to the lack of a large waterway system
between Morgan, Montana, and the

PADD III area capable of supporting barge traffic.

The alternative modes considered would be less safe, would require
construction of substantially more infrastructure, have greater
atmospheric emissions (including GHG), and/or pose greater safety
hazards than the proposed Project. Therefore, none of the alternative
modes of transportation have been evaluated

**ES.5.3 Pipeline Route Alternatives**

DOS identified alternatives to the proposed Project for the Steele
City Segment (SCS), the Gulf Coast

Segment (GCS), and the Houston Lateral (HL). In addition DOS considered
an alternative that would avoid using the Cushing Extension.

**ES.5.3.1 Steele City Segment Alternatives**

For the Steele City Segment, five alternatives were considered:
Express-Platte Alternative; SCS

Alternative A; SCS Alternative A1A; SCS Alternative B (the proposed
Project); and Baker Alternative.

The initial assessment of the Steele City Segment Alternatives
indicates that the alternatives considered do not offer an
environmental advantage over the Applicant's proposed route
(Alternative SCS-B), and are eliminated from further consideration.

**ES.5.3.2 Alternative to Using the Cushing Extension**

One alternative was identified that would avoid using the Cushing
Extension, the Western Alternative.

The Western Alternative does not offer an environmental advantage
over the proposed Project and was eliminated from further analysis.

**ES.5.3.3 Gulf Coast Segment Alternatives**

Two geographical alternatives were assessed for the Gulf Coast Segment:
Gulf Coast Segment (GCS)-A

(proposed Project) and GCS-B. While GSC-A would cross more wetlands
as compared to GCS-B, it would affect less overall agricultural land,
developed land, and crosses less streams/rivers. GCS-A was therefore
determined to be the environmentally preferred alternative and GCS-B
was eliminated from further analysis.

**ES.5.3.4 Houston Lateral Alternatives**

Alternatives identified for the Houston Lateral include Alternative
HL-A (the proposed Project) and

Alternative HL-B. Alternative HL-A, the environmentally preferred
alternative is the shorter route and would require fewer miles of
new pipeline and would have a lesser area of impact. Alternative HL-B

does not offer an environmental advantage over the Alternative HL-A,
and was eliminated from further

**ES.5.3.5 Summary of Pipeline Route Alternatives Analysis**

Based on the assessment of alternatives conducted, DOS determined
that none of the identified alternatives offered an environmental
advantage over the Applicant's preferred route. Therefore, the

DOS preferred route consists of the following alternatives by segment:

• Steele City Segment Alternative B (SCS-B);

• Gulf Coast Segment Alternative A (GCS-A); and

• Houston Lateral Alternative A (HL-A).

**ES.5.4 Alternative 230-kV Electrical Transmission Line Routes**

The 230-kV Lower Brule to Witten transmission line would be needed to
ensure transmission system reliability with the expected load demands
at full pipeline operational capacity in southern South Dakota.

Western and Basin Electric Power Cooperative (BEPC) have identified
two alternative transmission corridors (Alternative Corridors A and B)
for the Project and have identified five alternative routes in

Corridor A and four alternative routes in Corridor B. The corridors
extend from the Big Bend Dam and include the site of a proposed new
substation at Lower Brule and the existing Witten Substation.

The transmission line would transfer electricity from the proposed
Lower Brule Substation near Big Bend

Dam in Lyman County, to an existing substation near Witten in Tripp
County. The existing Big Bend-

Fort Thompson No. 2, 230-kV transmission line turning structure would
be converted to a double-circuit structure. Western would construct
2.1 miles of new double-circuit transmission line south of the dam and
construct the new Lower Brule Substation. The new transmission line
from the dam would connect to the Lower Brule Substation. Western
would own and operate the 2.1 mile transmission line but would
transfer ownership and operation of the Lower Brule Substation to
BEPC. BEPC would construct and operate the new, 70-mile-long, 230-kV
transmission line between the Lower Brule Substation and the existing
Witten Substation, which is owned by Rosebud Electric Cooperative. The
five alternative routes for the transmission line that were identified
within Corridor A and the four alternative routes identified within
Corridor B are all between the two substations.

Both of the alternative corridors cross the Lower Brule Reservation,
but the Corridor A has a shorter path through the Lower Brule
Reservation. The key impacts of the transmission line alternatives
are listed in the listed in EIS for comparison purposes. In addition,
the impacts of construction and operation of the transmission line
alternatives are generally addressed in Section 3.0 the EIS. However,
DOS, Western,

and the other cooperating agencies do not have sufficient design and
construction information to establish an agency preferred alternative
for the proposed transmission line project. An additional and separate

NEPA environmental review of the alternatives to the proposed
transmission line will be conducted after the alternative routes
are further defined. The design and environmental review of the
proposed 230-kV

transmission line are on a different schedule than the pipeline system
itself. Regional transmission system reliability concerns are not
associated with the initial operation of the proposed pipeline pump
stations, but rather with later stages of proposed pipeline operation
at higher levels of crude oil throughput.

**ES.5.5 Montana Major Facility Siting Act and Montana Environmental
Policy Act Environmental Review**

Keystone applied to MDEQ for a Certificate of Compliance under MFSA
for the portions of the proposed

Project in Montana. Prior to issuing a certificate, MDEQ must find and
determine the basis of the need for the facility and determine whether
or not the facility would serve the public interest, convenience,
and necessity. Under the law, it must also identify the route that
minimizes adverse environmental impacts and uses public land whenever
the use of public lands is as economically practicable as the use of
private land to include use of federal lands. As a cooperating agency
in the preparation of the EIS, MDEQ

considered and eliminated the Project alternatives described above
under the federal NEPA process.

MDEQ also required Keystone to identify and provide assessments of
two additional alternative routes in

Montana that increased the use of public lands in comparison to
Alternative SCS-B (proposed route).

Although both of the new alternatives were eliminated in the initial
screening process, portions of one of the alternatives cross more
public land as compared to the proposed route segments in those areas.

MDEQ identified those portions of the alternative as variations to
Alternative SCS-B and evaluated them along with other variations
it developed to avoid or minimize impacts to specific resources,
to minimize conflicts with existing or proposed residential and
agricultural land uses, and in response to requests submitted by
concerned landowners.

MDEQ identified and evaluated a total of 19 variations in
Montana. Descriptions of the variations and the evaluations are
presented in Appendix I along with environmental assessments of
Alternative SCS-B

in Montana that are specific to the needs of MEPA. MDEQ preliminarily
selected 9 variations as preferable to the segments of Alternative
SCS-B they would replace. DOS has determined that

Alternative SCS-B in Montana (the proposed route) and the variations
to Alternative SCS-B selected by

MDEQ have been evaluated sufficiently to meet the requirements of NEPA.

**ES.6 ENVIRONMENTAL ANALYSIS**

As summarized below, DOS evaluated the potential impacts of the Project
on geology, soils and sediments, water resources, wetlands, terrestrial
vegetation, wildlife, fisheries, threatened and endangered species,
land use, socioeconomics, cultural resources, and air quality and
noise. In addition, DOS

evaluated the potential risks and effects of oil spills and cumulative
impacts.

**ES.6.1 Geology**

**ES.6.1.1 Physiography and Surface and Bedrock Geology**

The proposed Project would not involve substantial long- or short-term,
large scale alteration of topography. Most of the proposed route would
be within areas where bedrock is buried by unconsolidated sediments
consisting of glacial till, alluvium, colluvium, loess and/or aeolian
deposits. In these areas, impacts to bedrock would be expected to
be minimal, and limited to areas where bedrock is within 8 feet of
the surface. Routine pipeline operation and maintenance activities
would not be expected to affect physiography or surface or bedrock
geology. During construction, blasting or ripping could be required
at locations where shallow bedrock is present within 8 feet of the
ground surface. Over the entire proposed Project route, approximately
9 miles would cross areas identified as potential blasting locations
and approximately 166 miles would cross areas identified as potential
ripping locations.

**ES.6.1.2 Paleontological Resources**

Fossil potential along the ROW is designated as being very low to
very high in Montana, low to high in

South Dakota, and not scaled but possible for Nebraska, Oklahoma,
and Texas. Rocks underlying the location of two new pump stations in
Kansas may be fossiliferous. Potential impacts to paleontological
resources during construction includes damage to or destruction of
fossils in shallow bedrock areas due to ripping and/or blasting,
erosion of fossil beds due to grading, and unauthorized collection of
fossils by construction personnel or the public. Keystone is preparing
a Paleontological Mitigation Plan prior to beginning construction on
federal and state lands. Fossils or other paleontological resources
found on private or other non-federal land would only be recovered
with approval of the landowner. There is currently an effort among
federal land management agencies in Montana such as BLM, USACE, and

MDEQ and other agencies to develop a Memorandum of Understanding
(MOU) for the identification,

evaluation and protection of paleontological resources in the state
of Montana; however, the Geology

Section of the EIS also describes protocols for these resources for
the whole proposed Project route.

Routine pipeline operations and maintenance activities are not expected
to affect paleontological

**ES.6.1.3 Mineral and Fossil Fuel Resources**

In the Project area, oil, natural gas, and coal comprise the major
energy resources. The proposed route would not cross the well-pads
of any active oil and gas wells. Accordingly, extraction of oil and
gas resources would not be affected by operation of the proposed
pipeline. The proposed pipeline route would not cross any known coal
mines therefore coal extraction would not be affected by the Project.

Sand, gravel and bentonite are also mined in Montana, South Dakota
and Nebraska. Crushed stone, coal

(lignite), clay, iron, peat, and sand are other mineral resources
present in the Project area. The proposed route would not cross any
active surface mines or quarries, construction; however, operation
of the

Project would limit access to sand, gravel, clay, and stone resources
that are within the width of the permanent pipeline ROW. Although
not currently planned, if surface mining was proposed for this area
in the future, the pipeline could limit access to these resources.

**ES.6.1.4 Geologic Hazards**

At certain locations along the proposed route, seismic hazards,
landsliding, subsidence, or flooding would be possible. Since the
proposed pipeline ROW would be located in the relatively flat and
stable continental interior, the potential for impacts from geologic
hazards is lower than for facilities located in active mountain
belts or coastal areas. Based on the evaluation of potential seismic
hazards along the proposed ROW, the risk of pipeline rupture from
earthquake ground motion would be considered minimal. The proposed
route would not cross any known active faults and is located outside
of known zones of high seismic hazard. During construction activities,
vegetation clearing and alteration of surface-drainage patterns could
increase landslide risk. Implementation of temporary erosion control
structures would reduce the likelihood of construction-triggered
landslides. In addition, Keystone plans to revegetate areas disturbed
by construction along the pipeline ROW. There is a risk of subsidence
where the proposed route crosses karst formations in Nebraska,
Oklahoma, and Texas. Keystone would conduct site-specific studies
as necessary to characterize the karst features, and would evaluate
and modify construction techniques as necessary in these areas. The
overall risk to the pipeline from karst-

related subsidence is expected to be minimal.

**ES.6.2 Soils and Sediments**

Pipeline construction activities, including clearing, grading, trench
excavation, backfilling, heavy equipment traffic, and restoration
along the construction ROW, could adversely affect soil resources. In
addition, the construction of pump stations, access roads, construction
camps and the tank farm could also affect soil resources. Potential
impacts could include temporary and short-term soil erosion, loss of
topsoil, short-term to long-term soil compaction, permanent increases
in the proportion of large rocks in the topsoil, and short-term to
permanent soil contamination. Pipeline construction also could result
in damage to existing tile drainage systems. Keystone has proposed
construction procedures that are designed to reduce the likelihood and
severity of Project impacts to soils and sediments, and to mitigate
where impacts are unavoidable. These include, but are not limited to:
segregating and salvaging all topsoil up to a maximum of 12 inches
of topsoil from the area disturbed by trenching where practicable and
restoring topsoil to its approximate original stratum after backfilling
is complete; reducing soil erosion by installing sediment barriers,
trench plugs, temporary slope breakers, drainage channels or ditches,
and mulching; ripping to relieve soil compaction in particular areas
from which topsoil has been removed; and halting construction during
wet weather periods, or implementing methods to mitigate impacts when
construction activities are conducted in wet conditions.

During the operational phase of the Project, small scale, isolated
surface disturbance impacts could occur from pipeline maintenance
traffic and incidental repairs. These impacts would be addressed
with the affected landowner or land management agency and a mutually
agreeable resolution reached.

**ES.6.3 Water Resources**

**ES.6.3.1 Groundwater**

Potential impacts to groundwater during construction activities
could include: groundwater quality degradation during or after
construction resulting from disposal of materials and equipment,
or vehicle spills and leaks; temporary increases in total suspended
solids (TSS) concentrations where the water table is disturbed
during trenching and excavation activities; increased surface water
runoff and erosion from clearing vegetation in the ROW; degradation
of groundwater quality due to potential blasting; and groundwater
withdrawal for hydrostatic testing.

Many of the aquifers present in the subsurface beneath the proposed
route are isolated by the presence of glacial till or other confining
units, which characteristically inhibits downward migration of
water and
contaminants into these aquifers. However, shallow or near-surface
aquifers are also present beneath the proposed route and may be
impacted by construction activities. Additionally, the risk of
dewatering shallow groundwater aquifers or reducing groundwater quality
through an increase in total suspended solids during construction
likely would be temporary, and these aquifers are expected to recover
quickly following construction activities. Keystone's blasting plan
would include provisions to avoid impacts to groundwater and to
incorporate post-blasting testing for surface water and water wells
within 150 feet of the centerline to ensure that water resources are
not negatively affected by blasting activities. Hydrostatic testing
discharge waters would meet all water quality requirements prior to
discharge and would therefore not impact groundwater quality. All
applicable water withdrawal and discharge permits would be acquired
prior to hydrostatic testing. Construction and normal operations
therefore are not expected to result in a long-term significant impact
on groundwater.

**ES.6.3.2 Surface Water**

Potential impacts on surface water resources during construction
activities would include: temporary increases in TSS concentrations and
increased sedimentation during stream crossings; temporary to long term
decrease in bank stability and resultant increase in TSS concentrations
from bank erosion as vegetation removed from banks during construction
is re-establishing; temporary reduced flow in streams and potential
other adverse effects during hydrostatic testing activities; and
temporary degradation of surface water quality and alteration of
aquatic habitat from blasting activities within or adjacent to stream

Keystone would select one of the following construction methods for
surface waterbody crossings: dry-

cut methods, open cut wet crossings, and horizontal directional
drilling (HDD). Thirty-eight crossings have been identified for HDD
crossings. The HDD method would avoid any impacts on water bodies.

The open cut wet method, involving trenching while water continues
to flow, would entail a high risk of temporary siltation to streams
and other water bodies. The risks of open-cut wet trenching could be
temporary (for the duration of construction) or longer term (where
compromised stream bank stability or bank erosion occurs). Dry-cut
methods would greatly reduce risks to surface waterbodies but are not
feasible for wider streams and would only be used selectively during
construction. At all water crossings,

Keystone would use buffer strips, drainage diversion structures,
sediment barrier installations, and clearing limits to reduce siltation
and erosion. Hydrostatic test water would be discharged to the source
water at an approved location along the waterway or to an upland area
within the same drainage as the source water where it may evaporate
or infiltrate. Discharged water would be tested to ensure it meets
applicable water quality standards, and discharge rate would be
regulated.

**ES.6.3.3 Floodplains**

Floodplain terraces and low floodplains are found along the Project
route. Two pump stations and 10

MLVs would be in the 100-year floodplain as currently proposed, but
the effect of those facilities on floodplain function is expected to
be minor.

Actions by federal agencies, under EO 11988, must avoid to the extent
possible the long- and short-term adverse impacts associated with the
occupancy and modification of floodplain development including reducing
the risk of flood loss, minimizing the impact of floods on human
safety, health and welfare, and restoring and preserving the natural
and beneficial values served by floodplains. The pipeline would be
constructed under river channels with potential for lateral scour. In
floodplain areas adjacent to waterbodies, the contours would be
restored to as close to previously existing contours as practical and
the construction ROW would be revegetated so that after construction,
the pipeline would not obstruct flows over designated floodplains.

**ES.6.4 Wetlands**

Wetland types within the Project area include emergent wetlands,
scrub/shrub wetlands, and forested wetlands. The Project would disturb
a total of 554 acres of wetlands (not including pipe storage yards,

rail sidings, contractor's yards, access roads, or construction camps),
primarily forested wetlands

(271 acres) and emergent wetlands (262 acres), with minimal shrub/scrub
wetlands (21 acres). Additional impacts to wetlands from construction
camps and access roads outside of the 110-foot construction right-

of-way cannot be assessed until the actual locations for these sites
are determined.

Construction of the pipeline would affect wetlands and their functions
primarily during and immediately following construction activities,
but permanent changes also are possible.

Planned conservation measures (such as installing trench breakers
and/or sealing the trench to maintain the original wetland hydrology,
where the pipeline trench may drain a wetland; using timber riprap,

timber mats, and prefabricated equipment mats; and restoring wetland
areas within conservation lands or easements to a level consistent with
any additional criteria established by the relevant managing agency)

would avoid or minimize most impacts on wetlands associated with
construction and operation activities,

and would ensure that potential effects would be primarily minor and
short term. Impacts to forested wetlands are long-term and would be
considered permanent. Keystone would work with each USACE

district to determine what kind of compensation would be required for
the permanent conversion of forested wetland to herbaceous wetland,
and Keystone would continue to work with the USACE to develop a
Wetland Mitigation Plan.

**ES.6.5 Terrestrial Vegetation**

Construction of the pipeline would temporarily impact 11,533 acres
of grassland/rangeland and 2,523

acres of upland forest. The permanent ROW would impact 749.1 acres
of grassland/rangeland and 175.6

acres of upland forest. Grassland impacts due to pipeline construction
are expected to be minimal, and affected vegetative communities
generally are expected to reestablish within 2 years. Impacts on upland
forest and shrubland would be longer term than those anticipated for
grassland, because of the time required for these plant communities
to reestablish and reach mature, pre-construction conditions.

Keystone would implement measures to reduce impacts to forested
uplands and grasslands such as restoring original contours and
drainage patterns to the extent practicable after construction;
providing and maintaining temporary and permanent erosion control
measures on steep slopes or wherever erosion potential is high;
and reseeding the reclaimed construction ROW following cleanup and
topsoil replacement as closely as possible using seed mixes based
on input from the local NRCS and specific seeding requirements as
requested by the landowner or the land management agency.

After removal of vegetation cover and disturbance to the soil,
reestablishment of vegetation communities could be delayed or prevented
by infestations of noxious weeds and invasive plants. Vegetation
removal and soil disturbance during construction could create
optimal conditions for the establishment of many weeds. Keystone has
committed to control the introduction and spread of noxious weeds by
implementing construction and restoration procedures in coordination
with appropriate local, state, and federal agencies to prevent the
spread of noxious weeds, insects and soil borne pests.

There would be temporary and permanent impacts on about 51 miles of
Conservation Reserve Program

(CRP) land and less than 2 miles of Wetland Reserve Program lands
along the proposed pipeline corridor.

Successful restoration of native vegetation and CRP fields (defined
as 90 percent cover of desirable perennial plants, stable soils,
and comparable vegetation community composition) would be expected
within 4 to 8 years.

**ES.6.6 Wildlife**

The Project crosses six states with a diversity of wildlife, including
big game animals, small game animals and furbearers, waterfowl and
game birds, and many other nongame animals. Wildlife habitats along
the Project ROW include croplands, grasslands/rangelands (short-grass
prairie, mixed-grass prairie,

tall-grass prairie, and shrublands), upland forests and wetlands. These
vegetation communities provide foraging, cover, and breeding habitats
for wildlife. Construction of the proposed Project would result
in loss and alteration of about 22,493 acres of wildlife habitat,
including 11,533 acres of grasslands and rangelands, 2,523 acres of
forested habitat, and 554 acres of wetland habitats (including 271
acres of forested wetlands).

Pipeline construction can produce short term barriers to wildlife
movements. Blasting can cause both short-term disturbance, in the
form of increased noise, dust, and vibration, and permanent habitat
modification. The severity of the effects of blasting on wildlife would
primarily depend on timing and wildlife use of the area surrounding the
area to be blasted. Total habitat loss due to pipeline construction
would be small in the context of available habitat both because of
the linear nature of the Project and because restoration would follow
pipeline construction.

Additional potential impacts to wildlife during construction include
direct mortality, and stress or avoidance of feeding and/or reduced
breeding success due to exposure to noise and from increased human

Normal operation of the pipeline would result in negligible effects
on wildlife. Pipeline corridors may be used as travel corridors
by coyotes, deer, raccoons, and many other animals. Pipeline
produced habitat fragmentation may result in altered wildlife
communities. Animals adapted to exploiting edge habitats increase,
and animals requiring large contiguous habitats are displaced. Prey
species may experience reduced survival or reproduction due to
decreased abundance of forage species or reduced cover.

Potential impacts to wildlife from connected actions are direct
mortality due to collision with or electrocution by electrical
distribution and transmission lines, and reduced survival and
reproduction for ground nesting birds due to the creation of perches
for raptors in grassland and shrubland habitats. To reduce these
impacts, power providers may incorporate standard, safe designs,
as outlined in Suggested

Practice for Avian Protection on Power Lines (issued by the Avian
Power Line Interaction Committee

[APLIC] in 2006) into the design of electrical distribution lines in
areas of identified avian concern;

incorporate standard raptor-proof designs, as outlined in Avian
Protection Plan Guidelines (jointly prepared by the APLIC and the
USFWS in 2005)into the design of the electrical distribution lines
to prevent collision by foraging and migrating raptors; and route
electrical distribution lines and the 230-kV

electrical transmission line such that they avoid areas with grouse
leks, brood-rearing habitat, and wintering habitats that also support
wintering raptors.

**ES.6.7 Fisheries**

The Project would cross a total of 91 perennial streams that support
recreational or commercial fisheries

(18 in Montana, 10 in South Dakota, 15 in Nebraska, 16 in Oklahoma,
and 32 in Texas). Thirty-one of these perennial waterbodies that
support recreational or commercial fisheries, would be crossed using

HDD technology. All other stream crossings for recreational or
commercial fisheries perennial streams would use either the open-cut
wet crossing or an open-cut dry crossing methodology. Possible impacts
to fisheries could occur through siltation and disturbance of streams
crossed by the proposed pipeline and also through water removal for
hydrostatic testing and HDD operations.

Stream crossings could potentially increase sedimentation during
construction and result in bank erosion until erosion control measures
are implemented and the bank stabilizes. Construction of a dry open-cut
crossing is the most rapid and least impacting of the open-cut
methods, primarily because water is not flowing in the streambed and
sediments are not transported downstream. No impacts are expected to
fisheries resources from a dry open-cut crossing method. Construction
of open-cut wet crossings may result in short-term impacts including
direct mortality to fishery and aquatic resources. Sediment released
during trenching of the pipeline crossings would be transported by
the water flowing through the trench and has the potential to affect
downstream aquatic life and habitat through either direct exposure
or sediment deposition. Wet open-cut dam and pump crossings have a
moderate potential to temporarily affect fishery resources. Dam and
pump crossings may block or delay normal fish movements. Short-

term delays in movements of spawning migrations could have adverse
impacts on fisheries, however,

most crossings of streams less than 50 feet would be completed in
less than 2 days and potential impacts would be minor.

Successful HDD crossings would avoid direct disturbance to aquatic
habitat and stream banks. This method of stream crossing likely would
avoid affects to those recreational or commercial fisheries that occur
at the river or stream crossings. Drilling fluids and additives used
during implementation of a directional drill would be non-toxic to
the aquatic environment. A contingency plan to address a frac-out
during HDD including preventative and response measures to control
the inadvertent release of drilling lubricant would be maintained.

Keystone would be responsible for acquiring all permits required by
federal, state and local agencies for procurement of water and for the
discharge of water used in hydrostatic testing and HDD drilling. Any
water obtained or discharged would be in compliance with permit
requirements, including screening and withdrawal rates. Fisheries
impacts from water withdrawals would be short term and minor.

**ES.6.8 Threatened and Endangered Species**

Federally-protected threatened or endangered species and federal
candidate species with the potential to occur in the Project area
include three mammals, eight birds, one amphibian, six reptiles,
four fish, two invertebrates, and five plants. Of these, the Project
is expected to have no effect to 14 species, and the

Project may affect, but is not likely to adversely affect eight
species. There are six additional species to which a findings summary
was not applicable. The Project may affect, and is likely to adversely
affect one species, the American burying beetle. This determination is
based on the location of the Project within the known range and habitat
of the American burying beetle and the results from surveys along the

Steele City Segment of the Project. Direct impacts to American
burying beetles as a result of construction would result in
habitat loss, alteration of suitable habitat to unsuitable habitat,
increased habitat fragmentation, and the potential mortality to eggs,
larvae and adults. Even with trap and relocation efforts along the
proposed construction ROW, the proposed Project could result in the
potential accidental loss of individuals from construction-related
activities. Conservation measures have been proposed to protect
this species including setting up a compensatory mitigation plan for
potential impacts to the American burying beetle by contributing to
habitat conservation.

State-protected species potentially occurring along the Project ROW
include three mammals, nine birds,

six reptiles, 13 fish and one plant. Many sensitive and protected
species are tied to woodland, wetland, or prairie habitats; habitats
that historically were converted to agricultural use throughout the
Project area.

These animals have been identified and designated by federal and
state wildlife management agencies as being of conservation concern
after review of abundance, population trends, distribution, number
of protected sites, degree of threat to survival, suitable habitat
trends, degree of knowledge about the species,

and its life history. These designations are intended to assist with
conservation planning and maintenance of the state's natural heritage.

Keystone has begun formal Section 7 consultation for the American
Burying Beetle. Additional species-

specific conservation measures have been identified and include:
additional surveys for many species to discover the presence of the
species themselves, or their nests/dens/habitat; construction timing to
occur outside of the breeding/denning/spawning season; and reduce the
width of the construction ROW in areas where listed plant populations
have been identified, to the extent possible. To reduce impacts from
connected actions, Keystone would inform electrical power providers
of the requirements for Endangered

Species Act consultations with the USFWS for the electrical
infrastructure components constructed for electrical distribution
lines serving the Project as well as the 230-kV transmission line
to prevent impacts to threatened and endangered species. Keystone
would also develop a Migratory Bird Conservation Plan in consultation
with USFWS to avoid or mitigate potential Project-related impacts to
migratory birds.

**ES.6.9 Land Use**

The majority of land that would be affected by the Project is
privately owned (21,333 acres) with nearly equal amounts of federal
(579 acres) and state (582 acres) lands. Construction, operation,
and maintenance would cause temporary and permanent impacts to land
uses such as agriculture, rangeland,

forestland, residential and planned development, commercial and
industrial land, recreation and special interest areas, and visual
resources. Rangeland is the most common land type, accounting for
11,533

acres or 54.3 percent of the total land that would be affected during
construction; during operation 698

acres of the 8,613 acres, or 54.5 percent would be permanently impacted
by the ROW. Agricultural land accounts for 5,484 acres impacted during
construction with 2,011 acres needed for the permanent ROW.

Forestland, development, and water and wetlands make up the remaining
2,523; 945; and 747 acres,

respectively, which would be affected by construction. During operation
of the pipeline 1,071, 465, and

368 acres, of forestland, developed land, and water and wetlands,
respectively, would be included in the permanent ROW.

Within the Steele City Segment of the pipeline corridor are 102 tracts
of land and which are enrolled in or affected by the CRP. There are no
affected parcels in either the Gulf Coast Segment or Houston lateral.

Pipeline construction and operation should have no effect on
landowners' participation in CRP. FSA

would require that landowners, prior to pipeline construction, notify
the FSA of the planned construction activities; and commit to restoring
their land to its pre-construction condition. In doing so, land owners
should not lose their eligibility for participation in the CRP.

Keystone has agreed to compensate landowners for crop and other losses
on a case-by-case basis.

Keystone also has developed mitigation plans for limiting impacts on
soil drainage mechanisms,

compaction, irrigation systems, farm access areas, windbreaks
and living fences, and CRP lands. After construction, nearly all
agricultural land and rangeland along the ROW would be allowed to
return to production, and productivity is not expected to be reduced
significantly over the long term. Keystone has further sought to
minimize impacts on rangelands by developing range-specific mitigation
measures.

Keystone would implement procedures to reduce land impacts including:
implementing soil protection measures; preventing stoppage or
obstruction of irrigation systems except during pipeline installation
periods through irrigated areas; minimizing time of installation in
irrigated areas; repairing or restoring drain tiles; restoring farm
terraces to their pre-construction functions; restoring disturbed areas
with custom seed mixes (approved by landowners and land managers)
to match the native foliage; providing access to rangeland during
construction to the extent practicable; installing temporary fences
with gates around construction areas to prevent injury to livestock
or workers; and leaving in place hard plugs and installing soft plugs
to allow livestock and wildlife to cross the trench safely.

In some cases, construction of the pipeline may cause disrupted or
delayed recreational usage of private lands. Keystone would cooperate
with local agencies to reduce the conflict between recreational
users and pipeline construction. Impacts are expected to be only
short term. Noise impacts from pump stations
are expected to be minor. Recreational use access would not be affected
by pipeline operations within special management areas.

**ES.6.10 Socioeconomics**

Several types of socioeconomic effects could occur within the
region of influence. Temporary effects during construction of the
proposed Project could include changes in population levels or local
demographics, changes in the demand for housing and public services,
disruption of local transportation corridors, increased employment
opportunities and related labor income benefits, and increased
government revenues associated with sales and payroll taxes. Isolated
impacts on individual property owners and economic land use also could
occur along the pipeline route. The primary socioeconomic impacts
associated with long-term operation of the proposed Project likely
would include employment and income benefits resulting from long-term
staffing requirements and local operating expenditures, as well as an
increased property tax base and associated tax revenues. Long-term
impacts could include impacts to property owners if there is any
decrease in land value or usefulness as a result of the pipeline.

However, tilled agricultural land in most cases would still be useable
after construction.

The proposed pipeline has the potential to generate substantial direct
and indirect economic benefits for local and regional economies along
the pipeline route. During construction, these benefits would be
derived from the construction labor requirements of the Project and
spending on construction goods and services that would not otherwise
have occurred if the line were not built. At the local level, these
benefits would be in the form of employment of local labor as part
of the construction workforce and related income benefits from wage
earnings, construction expenditures made at local businesses, and
construction worker spending in the local economy.

A peak workforce of approximately 5,000 to 6,000 personnel would be
required to construct the entire

Project and it is estimated that 4,500 to 5,100 non-local
residents would temporarily move into the region of influence,
resulting in short-term population increases during the construction
period. Keystone is expected to utilize temporary local construction
labor where possible and it is estimated that approximately 10 to
15 percent (50 to 100 people per spread) could be hired from the
local work force for each spread, although this may not be possible
in rural areas. Non-local construction workers moving into the
region of influence would require short-term accommodations such as
hotels/motels, recreational vehicle sites, campgrounds and temporary
work camps (four camps are anticipated, two in Montana and two in
South Dakota).

Portions of the new pipeline and new and upgraded pumping stations
are located in areas with minority populations and with families
living below the poverty level; however, none over 50 percent. The
Project also is located in areas of majority populations and
with relatively few families living below the poverty level. The
Project is not expected to result in adverse impacts that would fall
disproportionately on minority or low-income populations located
along the pipeline route. Public participation in assessing the

Project is especially important in areas where low-income populations
and/or minority populations have the potential to be affected. Public
outreach would continue throughout the life of the Project.

**ES.6.11 Cultural Resources**

The Project area contains cultural resources resulting from human
settlement and other activities over the last 10,000 years. These
include archaeological sites, special activity areas such as food
processing sites,

cemeteries, and sites of spiritual and traditional use. Later historic
activities expressed on the landscape include mining-related resources,
railroads, commercial buildings, domestic residences, and agricultural
buildings. Many of these cultural resources are associated with
mineral exploration, transportation,

settlement, logging, and agricultural production. Lands and resources
are very important to Indian tribes
for subsistence gathering, for the collection of plants for medicines,
for spiritual and ceremonial purposes,

and for everyday life.

For the Project, the principal types of impacts on cultural resources
that could occur include physical destruction or damage to historic
properties caused by pipeline trenching or related excavations
or boring;

introduction of visual, atmospheric, or audible elements that diminish
the integrity of significant historic features by short-term pipeline
construction or construction of above ground appurtenant facilities,
roads and connected actions; and change of the character of historic
properties or of physical features that contribute to significance.

The evaluation of historic properties for the Project will not
be completed until full access to all parcels along the proposed
corridor is feasible. Additionally, the Project design, including a
determination of the final alignment after all route variations are
assessed, continues to evolve as a result of the NEPA and

Section 106 processes, continuing engineering analysis, and ongoing
landowner and land manager negotiations. As a result, DOS and the
consulting parties are developing a Programmatic Agreement

(PA) to facilitate the Section 106 process. The use of a PA for this
Project is consistent with 36 CFR

800.4(b)(2), which provides that when "alternatives under consideration
consist of corridors or large land areas, or where access to properties
is restricted, the agency official may use a phased process to conduct
identification and evaluation efforts." The PA would allow DOS and
the consulting parties to continue the identification and evaluation
of historic properties pursuant to the provisions in the PA should the

Project receive all necessary certifications and permits. The PA would
ensure that appropriate consultation procedures are followed and that
cultural resources surveys would be completed prior to construction.

Unanticipated Discovery Plans will be prepared for Montana, South
Dakota, Nebraska, Kansas,

Oklahoma, Texas and the Lower Brule Sioux Reservation. They will be
prepared in consultation with the consulting parties for this Project,
including the SHPOs of the six states, Indian tribes, as well as
state and federal agencies. Keystone would implement these plans,
with DOS oversight, in the event that unanticipated cultural materials
or human remains are encountered during the construction phase of the

Under Section 106 of the NHPA, the lead federal agency is required to
share Project information and consult with consulting parties. This
includes Indian tribes, SHPOs, local governments, and applicants for
federal permits. For this Project, DOS is consulting with six SHPOs,
over 95 Indian tribes, numerous federal and state agencies and local
governments, and to seek the views of the public. Government-to-

government Section 106 consultation meetings, direct mailings,
teleconferencing, direct telephone communications, and email will be
used to keep consulting party members informed and to solicit comments
on the Project.

Informal discussions with SHPOs and Indian tribes were initiated by
Keystone and their consultants in

2008 and 2009 when a number of tribal engagement meetings were
conducted in an effort to inform interested Indian tribes of the
Project and seek initial comments. DOS recognized its lead federal
agency status under Section 106 and its responsibilities to consult
directly with the Indian tribes, SHPOs, and agencies in its NOI issued
on January 28, 2009 in the FR.

**ES.6.12 Air Quality and Noise**

Air quality impacts associated with construction of the proposed
Project would include fugitive dust and emissions from fossil-fueled
construction equipment, open burning, temporary fuel transfer systems,
and associated fuel storage tanks, and the tank farm. Air emissions
typically would be localized, intermittent,

and short term since pipeline construction moves through an area
relatively quickly. Emissions would be controlled to the extent
required by state and local agencies.

Air quality impacts associated with operation of the proposed Project
would include minimal fugitive emissions from crude oil pipeline
connections and pumping equipment at the pump stations, minimal
emissions from mobile sources, and volatile organic compound (VOC)
and (hazardous air pollutant

(HAP) emissions from the crude oil storage tank at the Steele City tank
farm. All pipeline pumps would be electrically powered. The Project
would not cause or contribute to a violation of any federal, state,
or local air quality standards. In addition, Project operations would
not trigger the requirement for a Clean

Air Act Title V operating permit.

The Project would cross five counties that are designated as
nonattainment for the federal ozone standard.

Liberty, Chambers, and Harris counties are located in the
Houston-Galveston-Brazoria 8-hour ozone nonattainment area. Hardin
and Jefferson counties are located in the Beaumont-Port Arthur 8-hour
ozone nonattainment area. Emissions of ozone precursor compounds
(oxides of nitrogen [NOx] and VOCs)

would be evaluated against the General Conformity applicability
threshold levels and nonattainment area emissions budget. All Project
emissions of NOx and VOCs emitted during construction and operation
would be evaluated because no emissions would be covered under
air permit programs. As pipeline emissions are limited to fugitive
emissions from valves and flanges at pump stations and as there are no
crude terminals located along the portion of the project within the
Beaumont-Port Arthur nonattainment area, the General Conformity Rule
does not apply to these operational activities. NOx emissions for both

2011 and 2012 construction in the Houston-Galveston-Brazoria 8-hour
ozone nonattainment area would exceed the general conformity threshold
of 25 tons per year. Best Management Practices and other mitigation
measures would be required to mitigate emissions. However, NOx and
VOC emissions for operation in the Houston-Galveston-Brazoria 8-hour
ozone nonattainment area would be below the

General Conformity significance thresholds of 25 tons per year. Since
the operational emissions of NOx and VOC are well below the 25-ton
per year threshold, the General Conformity Rule does not apply to
these operational activities.

Noise impacts for a pipeline project generally fall into two
categories: temporary impacts resulting from operation of construction
equipment, and long-term or permanent impacts resulting from operation
of the facility. The Project would be constructed in primarily rural
agricultural areas. It is estimated that the existing ambient noise
level in the Project area is in the range of 40 dBA (rural residential)
to 45 dBA

(agricultural cropland). There are approximately 142 structures within
25 feet and 1,819 structures within

500 feet of the proposed pipeline centerline for Project. There are
approximately 55

residences/homes/mobile homes/cabins within 25 feet and 1,014
residences/home/mobile homes/cabins within 500 feet of the proposed
pipeline centerline. There are approximately 91 structures within
0.5 mile of all pump stations for Project. Residential, agricultural,
and commercial areas within 500 feet of the

ROW would experience short-term inconvenience from the construction
equipment noise.

Noise impacts from construction of the Project typically would be
localized, intermittent, and short term because construction moves
through an area relatively quickly (several hundred feet to 1.5 miles
or more per day). Pipeline construction activities in any one area
could last from 30 days to 7 weeks.

Construction of all pump stations would take approximately 18 to 24
months complete, and construction of the Steele City tank farm would
take approximately 15 to 18 months.

Measures to reduce noise impacts would include but are not limited
to: limiting the hours during which construction activities with
high-decibel noise levels are conducted in residential areas;
providing noise mitigation plans to the construction contractors
for implementation and enforcement by construction inspectors using
portable sound meters; and developing site-specific noise mitigation
plans to comply
with any specific regulations and obtain any applicable authorizations
or variances, if local noise regulations exist.

Noise impacts from operation of the pipeline would be from the
pump stations. Material traveling through the buried pipeline would
not emit audible noise above the surface or a perceptible level of
vibration. Sound levels would attenuate nearly to existing ambient
noise levels (40 to 45 dBA) within

2,300 feet of the facility and would be considered minor. There are
approximately 91 structures within

0.5 mile (2,640 feet) of all pump stations for the Project. Although
noise impacts from the electrically-

powered pump stations are projected to be minor, Keystone would perform
a noise assessment survey during operations in locations where nearby
residents express concerns about pump station noise.

Mitigation measures can include construction of berms around the
facilities or planting vegetation

**ES.6.13 Reliability and Safety**

**ES.6.13.1 Oil Spill Risk**

Transportation of crude oil by pipeline involves risk to the public
and the environment in the event of an accident or an unauthorized
action, and subsequent release of oil. Releases of crude oil
from the Project and appurtenant facilities could occur. Spill
frequency can be estimated using historic spill frequencies on other
pipelines as determined from existing data bases and as supplemented
by considerations of new pipeline system age and technological
improvements compared with much older systems. Releases of oil or
petroleum products would affect the environment to varying degrees,
and would be of concern to all stakeholders. Risk of an oil spill
was assessed using failure frequencies derived from the general
hazardous liquid pipeline operating history. In addition to onsite fuel
facilities, construction of the proposed pipeline would involve tanker
trucks that deliver fuel and other fluids to operating equipment along
the construction ROW. Tanker and fuel or maintenance truck accidents
or fuel storage tank failures would be the most likely sources of
larger construction spills.

Spills from the proposed pipeline, associated pump stations, valves,
or pigging facilities could occur during Project operation and have
the potential to result in larger-volume spills. Spill locations
could include the pipeline ROW, pump stations, and construction and
contractor staging areas. Although leak detection systems would be
in place, some leaks might not be detected by the system. A pinhole
leak, for example, could potentially be undetectable for days or
weeks. If the proposed pipeline is subsurface within a wetland, the
crude oil would float and could be detected during a regular patrol
of the Project

ROW. Soil impacts from floating oil would likely be minor, although
active cleanup of the floating oil would likely produce high impacts
to the wetland system.

**ES.6.13.2 Impacts of Oil Spills**

Crude or refined oil released into the environment (oil spills) may
affect natural resources, protected areas, human uses and services,
and aesthetics to varying degrees, depending on the cause, size, type,

volume, location, season, environmental conditions, and associated
response actions. Small oil spills

(e.g., intermittent leaks and drips from construction machinery
and operating equipment) would be almost certain to occur during
construction and operation of the Project. There would be a very
limited potential for an operational pipeline spill of sufficient
magnitude to significantly affect natural resources and human uses
of the environment.

Almost all spills from the proposed pipeline would be crude oil. Based
on experience, spills would be more likely to occur in developing
areas where excavation activities are common, and at locations where
based on soil and other physical conditions the corrosion potential is
greatest. The locations of greatest concern for potential oil spills
would be in sensitive environmental areas, especially wetlands, flowing
streams and rivers, and water intakes for drinking water or
commercial/industrial users. Potential impacts to the natural
environment from oil spills would include but are not limited to:
coating wildlife feathers or fur reducing insulating efficiency
, which could result in hypothermia; coating sediments and soils
reducing water and gas (e.g., oxygen and carbon dioxide) exchange
and affecting subterranean organisms;

coating beaches, water surfaces, wetlands, and other resources used
by people resulting in offensive odors, visual impacts and soiling
of humans, animals, habitats and equipment; toxicological impacts
including direct and acute mortality, sub-acute interference with
feeding or reproductive capacity,

disorientation, narcosis, reduced resistance to disease, tumors,
reduction or loss of various sensory perceptions, interference with
metabolic, biochemical, and genetic processes, and a host of other
acute or chronic effects; contamination of soil and water resources
through oil spill containment or clean up actions; minor short
to long-term surface water and/or groundwater quality degradation
from sporadic equipment and vehicle spills or leaks; and damage to
recreational and historic values.

The impact of an oil spill would be heavily influenced by the types
of receptors (i.e., habitats, natural resources, and human uses)
that might be exposed to the oil. For spills ranging in magnitude
from very small to significant, response time and actions by
Keystone and its response contractors would likely prevent the oil
from reaching sensitive receptors or would contain and clean up the
spills before significant environmental impacts occurred. Most spills
in this category are likely to occur on construction sites or at
operations and maintenance facilities, and would not reach the natural
environment. For large spills and very large spills, especially those
that reach aquatic habitats, the response time between initiation
of the spill event and arrival of the response contractors would
influence the magnitude of impacts to the natural environment and
human uses. Once the response contractors are at the spill scene,
the efficiency, effectiveness, and environmental sensitivity of the
response actions (e.g.,

containment and clean up of oil, and protection of resources and human
uses from further oiling) would substantially influence the type and
magnitude of additional environmental impacts.

**ES.6.13.3 Mitigation Measures**

The Project's pipeline system would be designed, constructed, and
maintained in a manner that meets or exceeds industry standards and
regulatory requirements. The Project would be built within an approved

ROW. Signage would be installed at all road, railway, and water
crossings, indicating that a pipeline is located in the area, to help
prevent third-party damage or impact to the proposed pipeline. Keystone
would manage a crossing and encroachment approval system for all
other operators. Keystone would ensure safety near its facilities
through a combination of programs encompassing engineering design,

construction, and operations; public awareness and incident prevention
programs; and emergency response programs.

To prevent or mitigate potential oil spills during construction of the
proposed pipeline, measures would be implemented at each construction
or staging area where fuel, oil, or other liquid hazardous materials
are stored, dispensed, or used.

Historically, the most significant risk associated with operating
a crude oil pipeline is the potential for third-party excavation
damage. Keystone would mitigate this risk by implementing a
comprehensive

Integrated Public Awareness Program focused on education and
awareness. The program would provide awareness and education that
encourages use of the state one-call system before people begin
excavating.

Keystone's operating staff also would complete regular visual
inspections of the ROW and monitor activity in the area. Keystone's
preventative maintenance, inspection, and repair program would
monitor the integrity of the proposed pipeline and make repairs if
necessary. Keystone's pipeline maintenance program would include
routine visual inspections of the ROW, regular inline (pigging)
inspections, and collection of predictive data. Data collected in each
year of the program would be fed back into the decision-making process
for development of the following year's inspection, maintenance, and
repair program. The pipeline system would be monitored 24 hours a day,
365 days per year.

Keystone has developed and implemented Project safeguards
after conducting a pipeline threat analysis using the pipeline
industry-published list of threats issued by the American Society
of Mechanical

Engineers (ASME B31.8S) and also using threats identified by PHMSA to
determine the applicable threats to the proposed pipeline. Keystone
would be required to provide an Emergency Response Plan

(ERP) and a Spill Prevention Control and Countermeasure (SPCC)
plan prior to receiving authorization from PHMSA OPS to operate the
pipeline system. Keystone would utilize a comprehensive Supervisory

Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA) system to monitor and control
the proposed pipeline. Data provided by the SCADA system would alert
the Operations Control Center (OCC) operator to an abnormal operating
condition, indicating a possible spill or leak. A back-up communication
system also would be available should SCADA communications fail
between field locations and the OCC.

Additionally, Keystone would perform any other procedures mandated
by PHMSA in the event that

PHMSA approves a special permit related to maximum operating pressures
for the pipeline system.

In summary, the reliability and safety of the Project is expected to
be well within industry standards.

Further, the low probability of large, catastrophic spill events and
the routing of the proposed pipeline to avoid most sensitive areas
suggest a low probability of impacts to human and natural resources.

Nevertheless, the potential for construction and operation-related
spills does exist.

**ES.6.14 Cumulative Impacts**

As defined in 40 CFR 1508.7, cumulative impacts are the incremental
impacts on the environment resulting from adding the proposed
action to other past, present, and reasonably foreseeable future
actions. Cumulative impacts were assessed by combining the potential
environmental impacts of the proposed action with the impacts of
projects that have occurred in the past, are currently occurring,
or are proposed in the future within the pipeline corridor or in the
vicinity of the pipeline ROW.

**ES.6.14.1 Past, Present and Reasonably Foreseeable Projects**

The Project area includes numerous existing, under construction,
and planned linear energy transportation systems, including natural
gas pipelines, carbon dioxide (CO2) pipelines, crude oil pipelines,
and electric transmission lines. Additionally, the general Project
area supports a major water delivery project and a number of energy
development projects, including producing oil and natural gas well
fields (with associated collection piping systems), coal mines,
and wind power facilities. The potential impacts associated with
these projects that are most likely to be cumulatively significant
are related to wetlands and waterbodies, vegetation and wildlife,
land use, air quality, noise, and socioeconomics.

The operation of existing oil, natural gas, and CO2 pipeline systems
have resulted primarily in alteration of land uses, terrestrial
vegetation, and wildlife habitat. Cumulative impacts associated with
existing pipelines within the Project area would be primarily related
to noise emanating from pump stations (oil pipelines) and compressor
stations (natural gas pipelines) and the cumulative increases in the
width of

ROWs in areas where the proposed Project would be adjacent to existing
ROWs. In those areas where the proposed Project is not directly
adjacent to existing ROWs, but are located within the Project area,

there would be a cumulative change in vegetative resources, wildlife
habitat, and land uses associated with ROWs operation. The impacts
of existing ROWs in the context of the proposed Project have largely
been included in Section 3.0.

No other proposed oil pipelines have been identified within the Project
area. However, should additional oil pipelines be constructed within
the Project area, they would likely contribute to potential cumulative
impacts associated with habitat fragmentation, land use issues and
viewshed degradation. Several natural gas and CO2 pipelines have been
proposed in the vicinity of the Project area. Potential cumulative
impacts associated with the proposed Bison Pipeline Project and Green
Pipeline would be habitat
fragmentation, land use issues and viewshed degradation. Further,
a potential pipeline that would connect the Bakken Formation and
the proposed Project area could potentially result in similar
additional cumulative impacts to these resources. Should these or
other unidentified pipelines be under construction at the same time
as the Project, there may also be impacts to noise and air quality.

Due to advances in engineering, construction methods, and environmental
regulation, construction and operation of existing electrical power
lines typically encumber additional lands compared to more recent
projects; therefore, the impacts from these lines may be greater than
a line of similar length and energy capacity constructed in the recent
past or future. Planned electrical power distribution and transmission
lines that may be constructed in the general Project area includes
three proposed power projects.

However, of these proposed transmission lines, only the Nebraska Public
Power District would be located within the Project corridor. Cumulative
impacts which may arise include impacts to avian wildlife and
viewshed degradation. In addition, if the construction of future power
distribution or transmission lines in the Project corridor overlaps
with the proposed Project construction schedule, short-term cumulative
impacts associated with noise, dust, and general construction activity
could occur those areas where they would be constructed within the
proposed project corridor.

Wind resources in the contiguous U.S., specifically in the central
plains states, could accommodate as much as 16 times total current
demand for electricity in the U.S. There is a high concentration of
wind resources in the central plains region extending northward from
Texas to the Dakotas, westward to

Montana and Wyoming, and eastward to Minnesota and Iowa. Exploitation
of these wind resources would require significant extension of the
existing power transmission grid. Expansion and upgrading of the grid
will be required in any case to meet anticipated future growth in
U.S. electricity demand. It is therefore reasonable to assume that
there will be upgrades and extensions to the existing electrical
power transmission grid to support wind power development within
the Project area in the future. The magnitude of impacts from these
transmission line extensions would be dependant somewhat upon the
extent of new lines required to meet the needs of new and existing
wind farms. Likely cumulative impacts from future construction and
operation of transmission lines originating from wind farms may include
viewshed degradation and disruption to land uses, vegetation, and avian
wildlife. Should the construction of future transmission lines occur
concurrent with the proposed Project construction schedule within the
Project corridor, short-term cumulative impacts associated with noise,
dust, and general construction activity could occur.

**ES.6.14.2 Greenhouse Gases and Climate Change**

Crude oil delivered to PADD II and PADD III refineries by the Project
are likely to be replacing heavy crude oil from other less reliable
and diminishing sources. Assuming constant demand for refined oil
products, the incremental impact of the Project on GHG emissions would
be minor. Indirect GHG-related emissions during operation would be
associated with electrical generation for the pump stations

(approximately 2.6 to 4.4 million tons of CO2 per year for a proposed
initial capacity of 700,000 bpd and a potential capacity of 900,000
bpd, respectively). In addition, refining the quantity of crude oil
that would be delivered by the Project would produce an estimated
1.3 to 1.7 million tons of CO2 per year.

This assumes that the entire volume of oil transported by the project
would be heavy crude oil. However,

since the crude oil delivered by the Project would be replacing
similar crude oils from other sources, the incremental impact of these
emissions would be minor. Future refinery upgrades and expansions
could potentially increase the annual production of GHG in the PADD
II and PADD III area. Should such upgrades and expansions occur,
generation of GHG could potentially increase. The cumulative impact of
increased GHG emissions in this area would depend upon the potential
for reductions in GHG emissions elsewhere, consistent with developing
regulatory frameworks in the U.S., Canada and worldwide.

The proposed mitigation measures would serve to offset some of the
GHG emissions associated with the

Project. These measures would include revegetation of the construction
work areas, restoration of wetland functions, and compensatory wetland
mitigation for wetland impacts. Minimal direct GHG

emissions would be associated with operation (e.g., vehicle operation
and fugitive emissions), and indirect emissions would be associated
with electrical generation for the pump stations and refineries.

The potential impacts of climate change would not be expected
to affect the proposed Project. An increase in temperatures may
increase wildfires in the Project area. An increased intensity of
storm events, should this occur, may result in additional flooding in
some areas near the Project, particularly in the Gulf Coast Segment
and Houston Lateral should hurricane activity increase as a result
of oceanic temperature conditions. The Project would be designed
and constructed to be consistent with applicable federal, state,
and local standards, and therefore should be resistant to forces
associated with reasonably likely climate conditions during the
lifetime of the pipeline system. Other effects of climate change,
such as air quality degradation, health effects, reduced snow pack,
and agricultural issues, would not likely impact the proposed Project.

**ES.6.14.3 Extraterritorial Concerns**

While the Project analyzed in this draft EIS begins at the
international boundary where the pipeline would exit Saskatchewan,
Canada and enter the United States through Montana, the origination
point of the pipeline system would be in Alberta, Canada. Neither
DOS regulations (22 CFR 161.12) nor Executive

Order 12114, Environmental Effects Abroad of Major Federal Actions,
require this draft EIS to analyze impacts to the environment or
activities that occur outside of the United States. As a matter
of policy,

however, DOS has included information in this draft EIS regarding
the environmental analysis conducted

The analysis of environmental effects from the proposed Project
is occurring on both sides of the international border under the
appropriate regulatory authorities, as discussed in Section 1 of
this DEIS.

In Canada, the Canadian National Energy Board (NEB) conducted that
analysis, held public hearings in

September 2009, and issued its findings in March 2010.

The NEB completed its analyses in March 2010 and determined that the
proposed Project is required in

Canada to meet the present and future public convenience and necessity,
provided that the NEB terms and conditions outlined in the Project
certificate are met, including all commitments made by Keystone during
the hearing process.

Cumulative impacts to Canadian resources are limited by available
data at this time. However, as both the NEPA and NEB processes
proceed, additional information on potential cross international
boundary cumulative impacts would likely become available and would be
assessed to the degree possible for inclusion in the FEIS. Pertinent
NEB documents are provided in Appendix R.

**ES.6.15 Conclusions**

The information assessed in this draft EIS indicates that the proposed
Keystone XL Project would result in limited adverse environmental
impacts during both construction and operation, assuming that the

Project would be constructed and operated in compliance with:

• All applicable laws and regulations;

• The provisions in Keystone's proposed Construction, Mitigation
and Reclamation Plan

(Appendix B);

• The environmental specifications and water quality protection
requirements mandated by MDEQ

for Montana, as part of the Montana Major Facility Siting Act
certification process and presented in Attachments 1 and 2 to Appendix
I; and

• Other mitigation measures presented in this draft EIS.