**INTRODUCTION**

In September 2008, TransCanada Keystone Pipeline, LP (Keystone) filed
an application for a Presidential Permit with the U.S. Department of
State (DOS) to build and operate the Keystone XL Project. The proposed
Project would have the capacity to transport 700,000 barrels per day
(bpd) of crude oil to delivery points in Oklahoma and southeastern
Texas.

This Executive Summary of the final environmental impact statement
(final EIS) summarizes the proposed Project, including the purpose
of and need for the Project, and the major conclusions and areas of
concern raised by agencies and the public. More detailed information
on the proposed Project, alternatives to the proposed Project, and
the associated potential environmental impacts is presented in the
final EIS that is provided in the CD in the sleeve on the back page.

**PRESIDENTIAL PERMITTING PROCESS**

All facilities which cross the international borders of the United
States require a Presidential Permit. For liquid hydrocarbon pipelines,
the President, through Executive Order 13337, directs the Secretary of
State to decide whether a project is in the national interest before
granting a Presidential Permit.

As part of the Presidential Permit review process, DOS determined that
it should prepare an EIS consistent with the National Environmental
Policy Act (NEPA). DOS is the lead federal agency for the NEPA
environmental review of the Proposed Project because the need for a
Presidential Permit is the most substantial federal decision related to
the Proposed Project. To assist in preparing the EIS, DOS retained an
environmental consulting firm, Cardno ENTRIX, following DOS guidelines
on third- party contracts. The DOS environmental and safety review
of the proposed Project that lead to the final EIS was conducted
for nearly 3 years and included consultations with the third-party
contractor, cooperating agencies, and scientists and engineers with
expertise in key areas of concern related to the proposed Project.

The determination of national interest involves consideration of
many factors, including energy security; environmental, cultural,
and economic impacts; foreign policy; and compliance with relevant
federal regulations. Before making a decision, DOS will consult with
the eight federal agencies identified in Executive Order 13337: the
Departments of Energy, Defense, Transportation, Homeland Security,
Justice, Interior, and Commerce, and the Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA). DOS will also solicit public input on the national
interest determination by accepting written comments and holding
comment meetings in the six states traversed by the proposed route
and in Washington, D.C.

Figure ES-1 lists the major events, public outreach activities,
and other details of the environmental review and national interest
determination processes.

**SUMMARY OF THE KEYSTONE XL PROJECT**

The proposed Keystone XL Project consists of a crude oil pipeline
and related facilities that would primarily be used to transport
Western Canadian Sedimentary Basin crude oil from an oil supply hub
near Hardisty, Alberta, Canada to delivery points in Oklahoma and
Texas. The proposed Project would also be capable of transporting
U.S. crude oil to those delivery points. The U.S. portion of the
pipeline would begin near Morgan, Montana at the international border
of the United States and extend to delivery points in Nederland and
Moore Junction, Texas. There would also be a delivery point at Cushing,
Oklahoma. These three delivery points would provide access to many
other U.S. pipeline systems and terminals, including pipelines to
refineries in the U.S. Gulf Coast region. Market conditions, not the
operator of the pipeline, would determine the refining locations of
the crude oil. 

**Figure ES-1 U.S. Department of State Environmental and National
Interest Determination Review Processes**

The proposed Keystone XL pipeline would consist of approximately
1,711 miles of new 36-inch-diameter pipeline, with approximately 327
miles of pipeline in Canada and 1,384 miles in the U.S. Figure ES-3
depicts the three segments of the proposed Project in the U.S. As
noted in that illustration, the proposed Project would connect to
the northern and southern ends of the existing Cushing Extension of
the Keystone Oil Pipeline System.

Figure ES-4 illustrates the construction sequence that would be
followed for the proposed Project. The proposed Project would also
include 30 electrically operated pump stations, 112 mainline valves,
50 permanent access roads, and a new oil storage facility in Cushing,
Oklahoma. If market conditions change, the capacity of the proposed
Project could be increased to 830,000 bpd by increasing pumping
capacity at the proposed pump stations.

The overall proposed Keystone XL Project is estimated to cost $7
billion. If permitted, it would begin operation in 2013, with
the actual date dependant on the necessary permits, approvals,
and authorizations.

**Transport of Canadian Oil Sands Crude Oil**

The proposed Keystone XL Project would primarily transport crude
oil extracted from the oil sands areas in Alberta, Canada. Oil
sands (which are also referred to as tar sands) are a combination
of clay, sand, water, and bitumen, which is a material similar to
soft asphalt. Bitumen is extracted from the ground by mining or by
injecting steam underground to heat the bitumen to a point where it
liquefies and can be pumped to the surface.

Bitumen is treated in several ways to create crude oil suitable for
transport by pipeline and refining. The types of Canadian crude oil
that would be transported by the proposed Project would primarily
consist of synthetic crude oil and diluted bitumen.

Synthetic crude oil is produced from bitumen using refining methods --
a process termed upgrading -- that in general converts bitumen into
lighter liquid hydrocarbons. In other words, the bitumen is converted
into a crude oil similar to conventional crude oil.

**Figure ES-2 36-Inch-Diameter Crude Oil Pipe** 

**Pipe Specifications**

• Material: High-strength X70 steel pipe, API 5L

• Outside diameter: 36 inches • Operating Pressure: 1,308 psig
• External Coating: fusion-bonded

See Section 2.3.1 for further information on pipe specifications.

**Figure ES-1 (Cont.) U.S. Department of State Environmental and
National Interest Determination Review Processes**

Diluted bitumen -- often termed dilbit -- consists of bitumen
mixed with a diluent, which is a light hydrocarbon liquid such as
natural gas condensate or refinery naphtha. The bitumen is diluted to
reduce its viscosity so that it is in a more liquid form that can be
transported via pipeline. Dilbit is also processed to remove sand,
water, and other impurities. The diluents in dilbit are integrally
combined with the bitumen to form a crude oil that is a homogenous
mixture that does not physically separate when released.

Both synthetic crude oil and dilbit are similar in composition and
quality to the crude oils currently transported in pipelines in the
U.S. and being refined in Gulf Coast refineries. Neither type of
crude oil requires heating for transport in pipelines.

**Transport of U.S. Crude Oil**

In late 2010, Keystone Marketlink, LLC announced plans for two
separate projects that would enable crude oil from domestic sources
to be transported in the proposed Keystone XL Project. Those two
projects, the Bakken Marketlink Project and the Cushing Marketlink
Project, are considered "connected actions" under NEPA. The Bakken
Marketlink Project would allow transport of up to 100,000 bpd of crude
oil from the Bakken formation in the Williston Basin in Montana and
North Dakota.

These fields have experienced high growth in the last few years as new
technology has allowed the oil to be profitably extracted. Keystone
currently has long- term commitments for transporting 65,000 bpd
of crude oil in the proposed Keystone XL Project from the Bakken
Marketlink Project.

The Cushing Marketlink Project would allow transport of up to 150,000
bpd on the proposed Project from the Cushing, Oklahoma area to the
proposed Keystone XL Project delivery points in Texas.

**Other Connected Actions**

In addition to the Marketlink projects, there are two other types of
connected actions associated with the proposed Project: electrical
distribution lines and substations that would provide power for the
pump stations, and an electrical transmission line that would be
required to ensure transmission system reliability when the proposed
Project is operating at maximum capacity. Those projects would not be
built or operated by Keystone, and the permit applications for those
projects would be reviewed and acted on by other agencies. Although
only limited information was available on the design, construction,
and operation of the projects, DOS assessed the potential impacts of
the projects based on currently available information. 

**Figure ES-3**

**Proposed Pipeline Route** 

**Figure ES-4**

**Typical Pipeline Construction Sequence**

**PURPOSE OF AND NEED FOR THE KEYSTONE XL PROJECT**

The primary purpose of the proposed Project is to provide the
infrastructure necessary to transport Western Canadian Sedimentary
Basin heavy crude oil from the U.S. border with Canada to delivery
points in Texas in response to the market demand of Gulf Coast
refineries for heavy crude oil. This market demand is driven by the
need of the refiners to replace declining feed stocks of heavy crude
oil obtained from other foreign sources with crude oil from a more
stable and reliable source. Keystone currently has firm, long-term
contracts to transport 380,000 bpd of Canadian crude oil to the Texas
delivery points.

An additional purpose of the proposed Project is to transport Canadian
heavy crude oil to the proposed Cushing tank farm in response to the
market demand of refineries in the central and Midwest U.S. for heavy
crude oil. Keystone also has firm contracts to transport 155,000 bpd
of Canadian crude oil to

Cushing, Oklahoma in the existing Keystone Oil Pipeline Project. If
the proposed Project is approved and implemented, Keystone would
transfer shipment of crude oil under those contracts to the proposed
Project. Although there is sufficient pipeline capacity from Canada
to the U.S. in general to accommodate projected additional imports
of Canadian crude in the short to medium term, there is extremely
limited pipeline transport capacity to move such crude oils to Gulf
Coast refineries.

The 58 refineries in the Gulf Coast District provide a total
refining capacity of approximately 8.4 million bpd, or nearly half of
U.S. refining capacity. These refineries provide substantial volumes of
refined petroleum product, such as gasoline and jet fuel, via pipeline
to the Gulf Coast region as well as the East Coast and the Midwest.

In 2009, Gulf Coast refineries imported approximately 5.1 million bpd
of crude oil from more than 40 countries. The top four suppliers were
Mexico, Venezuela, Saudi Arabia, and Nigeria. Of the total 

volume imported, approximately 2.9 million bpd was heavy crude oil
similar to the crude oil that would be transported by the proposed
Project; Mexico and Venezuela were the major suppliers. However,
imports of heavy crude oil from these two countries have been in steady
decline while Gulf Coast refining capacity is projected to grow by
at least 500,000 bpd by 2020, with or without the proposed Project.

**PROJECT DESIGN AND SAFETY**

The Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration (PHMSA),
a federal agency within the U.S. Department of Transportation, is
the primary federal regulatory agency responsible for ensuring the
safety of America's energy pipelines, including crude oil pipeline
systems. As a part of that responsibility, PHMSA established regulatory
requirements for the construction, operation, maintenance, monitoring,
inspection, and repair of hazardous liquid pipeline systems.

In 2009, Keystone applied to PHMSA for a Special Permit to operate
the proposed Project at a slightly higher pressure than allowed
under the existing regulations. DOS worked with PHMSA to develop
Project-specific Special Conditions that would have been incorporated
into the Special Permit. However, in August 2010, Keystone withdrew
its application to PHMSA for a Special Permit. However, to enhance
the overall safety of the proposed Project, DOS and PHMSA continued
working on Special Conditions specific to the proposed Project and
ultimately established 57 Project-specific Special Conditions. As
a result, Keystone agreed to design, construct, operate, maintain,
and monitor the proposed Project in accordance with the more stringent
57 Project- specific Special Conditions in addition to complying with
the existing PHMSA regulatory requirements.

In consultation with PHMSA, DOS determined that incorporation of
the Special Conditions would result in a Project that would have a
degree of safety greater than any typically constructed domestic oil
pipeline system under current regulations and a degree of safety along
the entire length of the pipeline system that would be similar to that
required in high consequence areas as defined in the regulations. Key
aspects of the Special Conditions are summarized below. Appendix U
of the EIS presents the Special Conditions and a comparison of the
conditions with the existing regulatory requirements.

**Figure ES-5**

**Pipeline Cross-section** 

**Pipe Design and Manufacturing**

The first nine Special Conditions present design standards to be
used in manufacturing the pipe and requirements for pipe materials,
pipe inspections at the mill and in the field, performance tests,
and quality control procedures.

**System Design, Construction and Testing**

Conditions 10 through 23 address design and construction of the
proposed Project, including testing of Project components. Those
Conditions present requirements for aspects of the proposed Project
such as field coatings, depth of cover over the pipeline, temperature
and overpressure control, welding procedures, and testing prior
to operations. Testing requirements include hydrostatic testing,
a process which involves filling the line with water and increasing
the pressure within the pipeline to test the pipeline's ability to
withstand pressure. If the test water pressure drops, further testing
must be conducted and reported to PHMSA, and faulty pipeline sections
must be repaired or replaced. Operations could not begin until the
entire system has passed the required hydrostatic testing.

**Operations, Maintenance, and Monitoring**

Conditions 24 through 49 present the requirements for the Supervisory
Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA) system that would be used to
remotely monitor and control the pipeline, as well as requirements for
internal corrosion inspection, cathodic protection, identification
of the location of the pipeline with aboveground markers, internal
pipeline inspections using electronic sensing devices termed
"smart pigs," visual monitoring of the pipeline corridor, and repair
procedures. The SCADA system would alert the Operations Control Center
of an abnormal operating condition, indicating a possible release of
oil. The system would include automatic features that would ensure
operation within prescribed pressure limits. There would also be a
complete backup system.

**Figure ES-6 Smart Pig**

Pipeline pressure is the primary indicator used by the SCADA system to
detect an oil spill. If the monitoring system identifies a pressure
change in the pipeline, the controller would evaluate the data to
determine if it is a false alarm or an actual spill. Using pipeline
pressure allows the operator to detect leaks down to approximately
1.5 to 2 percent of pipeline flow rate.

The proposed Project would also include a computer- based system that
does not rely on pipeline pressure to assist in identifying leaks
below the 1.5 to 2 percent detection thresholds.

In addition to computer monitoring, there would be scheduled patrols
of the pipeline right-of-way as well as public and landowner awareness
programs. Communities along the pipeline would be given information
to facilitate the reporting of suspected leaks and events that could
suggest a threat to pipeline safety.

**Reporting, Record Keeping, and Certification**

The final eight conditions present requirements for maintaining
detailed records, development a right-of- way management plan,
reporting to PHMSA, and providing PHMSA with certification from a
senior officer of Keystone that it has complied with the Special
Conditions. 

**SPILL POTENTIAL AND RESPONSE**

Spills could result from many causes, including corrosion (external
or internal), excavation equipment, defects in materials or in
construction, over- pressuring the pipeline, and geologic hazards,
such as ground movement, washouts, and flooding. Although the leak
detection system would be in place, some leaks might not be detected by
the system. For example, a pinhole leak could be undetected for days or
a few weeks if the release volume rate were small and in a remote area.

In most cases the oil from a small leak would likely remain within or
near the pipeline trench where it could be contained and cleaned up
after discovery. As a result, for most small leaks it is likely that
the oil would be detected before a substantial volume of oil reaches
the surface and affects the environment. Spills may be identified
during regular pipeline aerial inspections, by ground patrols and
maintenance staff, or by landowners or passersby in the vicinity of
the spill.

For larger spills, the released oil would likely migrate from the
release site. However, DOS analysis of previous large pipeline
oil spills suggests that the depth and distance that the oil would
migrate would likely be limited unless it reaches an active river,
stream, a steeply sloped area, or another migration pathway such as
a drainage ditch.

**Estimated Frequency of Spills**

In spite of the safety measures included in the design, construction,
and operation of the proposed Project, spills are likely to occur
during operation over the lifetime of the proposed Project. Crude oil
could be released from the pipeline, pump stations, or valve stations.

Although a large spill could occur at the proposed Cushing tank
farm, each of the three 350,000-barrel tanks would be surrounded by a
secondary containment berm that would hold 110 percent of the contents
of the tank plus freeboard for precipitation. Therefore, there would
have to be a concurrent failure of the secondary containment berm
for a tank-farm spill to reach the area outside of the tank. Such an
event is considered unlikely.

DOS calculated estimates of spill frequency and spill volumes. Those
estimates included potential spills from the pipeline, pump stations,
and valve stations. The calculations used data from the PHMSA spill
incident database for hazardous liquid pipelines and crude oil
pipelines, and from the National Response

Center (NRC) database for releases and spills of hazardous substances
and oil.

Based on those data, DOS calculated that there could be from 1.18
to 1.83 spills greater than 2,100 gallons per year for the entire
Project. The estimated frequency of spills of any size ranged from
1.78 to 2.51 spills per year.

Keystone submitted a risk analysis that also included an
estimate of the frequency of spills over the life of the proposed
Project. Keystone's analysis was for the pipeline only and did not
include releases from pump stations, valve stations, or the tank farm.

Keystone initially calculated a spill frequency of 1.38 spills per year
based only on the historical PHMSA spill incident database available
in 2008 when the application was submitted. Keystone also calculated
a Project-specific spill frequency for the pipeline that considered
the specific terrain and environmental conditions along the proposed
Project corridor, required regulatory controls, depth of cover,
strength of materials, and technological advances in the design of
the proposed Project. Using those factors, Keystone estimated that
there could be 0.22 spills per year from the pipeline.

**Spills from the Existing Keystone Oil Pipeline System**

The existing Keystone Oil Pipeline System has experienced 14 spills
since it began operation in June 2010. The spills occurred at fittings
and seals at pump or valve stations and did not involve the actual
pipeline. Twelve of the spills remained entirely within the confines
of the pump and valve stations. Of those spills, 7 were 10 gallons or
less, 4 were 100 gallons or less, 2 were between 400 and 500 gallons,
and 1 was 21,000 gallons.

The spill of 21,000 gallons occurred when a fitting failed at the
Ludden, North Dakota pump station. As a result, PHMSA issued a
Corrective Action Order, halting pipeline operation. Keystone was
required to consult with PHMSA before returning the pipeline to
operation. In that incident, most of the oil was contained within
the pump station, but 210 gallons discharged from the pump station to
adjacent land. The land affected was treated in place in compliance
with North Dakota Department of Health land treatment guidelines. 

**Maximum Spill Volume**

Keystone conducted an assessment of the maximum potential pipeline
spill volume from a complete pipeline structural failure. Keystone
estimated that the maximum spill volume would be approximately 2.8
million gallons, which would be possible along less than 1.7 miles
of the proposed pipeline route due to topographic conditions. For
approximately 50 percent of the proposed pipeline route (approximately
842 miles), the maximum spill volume would be approximately 672,000
gallons.

**Figure ES-7 Pump Station on the Existing Keystone Oil**

**Pipeline System**

**Emergency Planning**

As required by PHMSA regulations, Keystone must submit an Emergency
Response Plan and a Pipeline Spill Response Plan to PHMSA for review
prior to initiation of operation of the proposed Project. These plans
would not be completed until the final details of the proposed Project
are established in all applicable permits.

If a leak is suspected, the Emergency Response Plan and Pipeline
Spill Response Plan would be initiated. After confirmation that a
spill occurred, the operator would shut down pumps and close the
isolation valves, actions that would require approximately 12 minutes.

**Local Emergency Planning Committees (LEPCs)**

LEPCs were established as a part of the Emergency Planning and
Community Right-to-Know Act. Keystone has committed to a communication
program to reach out to LEPCs along the proposed pipeline corridor
during development of the Emergency Response Plan and the Pipeline
Spill Response Plan, with particular consideration given to emergency
planning for low income and minority populations. The LEPCs would
participate in emergency response consistent with their authority
under the Right-to- Know Act and as required by their local emergency
response plans.

**POTENTIAL ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS OF OIL SPILLS**

Impacts from an oil spill would be affected by variables such as the
weather, time of year, water level, soil, local wildlife, and human
activity. The extent of impact would also depend on the response time
and capabilities of the emergency response team.

The greatest concern would be a spill in environmentally sensitive
areas, such as wetlands, flowing streams and rivers, shallow
groundwater areas, areas near water intakes for drinking water or for
commercial/industrial uses, and areas with populations of sensitive
wildlife or plant species.

**General Types of Potential Impacts**

There are two primary types of impacts that occur with a spill of
crude oil -- physical impacts and toxicological impacts. Physical
impacts typically consist of the coating of soils, sediments, plants,
and animals. The coating of organisms can result in effects such
as preventing them from feeding or obtaining oxygen, reducing the
insulating ability of fur or feathers, and adding weight to the
organism so that it cannot move naturally or maintain balance. In
addition, oil may coat beaches along rivers or lakes and foul other
human-use resources.

Toxicological impacts of an oil spill are a function of the chemical
composition of the oil, the solubility of each class of compounds in
the oil, and the sensitivity of the area or organism exposed. Crude
oil may be toxic when ingested. Ingestion typically occurs when
an oiled animal attempts to clean its fur or feathers. Some of the
possible toxic effects include direct mortality, interference with
feeding or reproductive capacity, disorientation, reduced resistance
to disease, tumors, reduction or loss of various sensory perceptions,
and interference with metabolic, biochemical, and genetic processes.

Birds typically are the most affected wildlife due to an oil
spill. Oil on feathers causes hypothermia or drowning due to the
loss of flotation, and birds may suffer both acute and chronic
toxicological effects. In addition, dead oiled birds may be scavenged
by other animals. 

Fish and aquatic invertebrates could also experience toxic impacts
of spilled oil. The potential impacts would generally be greater in
standing water habitats − such as wetlands, lakes and ponds −
than in flowing rivers and creeks.

Crude oil spills are not likely to have toxic effects on the general
public because of the many restrictions that local, state and federal
agencies impose to avoid environmental exposure after a spill.

**Potential Impacts to the Ogallala Aquifer and other Groundwater
Areas**

DOS recognizes the public's concern for the Northern High Plains
Aquifer System, which includes the Ogallala aquifer formation and
the Sand Hills aquifer unit.

The Northern High Plains Aquifer system supplies 78 percent of the
public water supply and 83 percent of irrigation water in Nebraska and
approximately 30 percent of water used in the U.S. for irrigation and
agriculture. Of particular concern is the part of the aquifer which
lies below the Sand Hills region. In that region, the aquifer is at
or near the surface.

DOS assessed the potential impacts of the proposed Project on many
aquifer systems. The aquifer analysis included the identification
of potable groundwater in water wells within 1 mile of the proposed
centerline of the pipeline. More than 200 Public Water Supply wells,
most of which are in Texas, are within 1 mile of the proposed
centerline, and 40 private water wells are within 100 feet of the
centerline. No sole-source aquifers, or aquifers serving as the
principal source of drinking water for an area, are crossed by the
proposed pipeline route.

The potential for a crude oil spill to reach groundwater is related
to the spill volume, the viscosity and density of the crude oil,
the characteristics of the environment into which the crude oil is
released (particularly the characteristics of the underlying soils),
and the depth to groundwater. The depth to groundwater is less than
10 feet for about 65 miles of the proposed route in Nebraska and
there are other areas of shallow groundwater in each state along
the proposed route. Diluted bitumen and synthetic crude oil, the
two types of crude oil that would be transported by the proposed
Project, would both initially float on water if spilled. Over time,
the lighter aromatic fractions of the crude oil would evaporate,
and water-soluble components could enter the groundwater.

Studies of oil spills from underground storage tanks indicate that
potential surface and groundwater impacts are typically limited to
several hundred feet or less from a spill site. An example of a crude
oil release from a pipeline system into an environment similar to the
Northern High Plains Aquifer system occurred in 1979 near Bemidji,
Minnesota.

While the conditions at Bemidji are not fully analogous to the Sand
Hills region, extensive studies of the Bemidji spill suggest that
impacts to shallow groundwater from a spill of a similar volume in
the Sand Hills region would affect a limited area of the aquifer
around the spill site. In no spill incident scenario would the entire
Northern High Plains Aquifer system be adversely affected.

In addition to the Northern High Plains Aquifer system, there are
other groundwater areas along the proposed route, including shallow
or near-surface aquifers. DOS in consultation with PHMSA and EPA
determined that Keystone should commission an independent consultant
to review the Keystone risk assessment. The independent review will
be conducted by a firm approved by DOS in concurrence with PHMSA
and EPA, and would focus on a review of valve placement and the
possibility of deploying external leak detection systems in areas
of particularly sensitive environmental resources, but would not be
limited to those issues. The specific scope of the analysis will be
approved by DOS, PHMSA, and EPA. DOS, with concurrence from PHMSA and
EPA, will determine the need for any additional mitigation measures
resulting from the analysis.

**Potential Environmental Justice Concerns**

Low income and minority communities could be more vulnerable to health
impacts than other communities in the event of a spill, particularly if
access to health care is less available in the release area. Exposure
pathways could include direct contact with the crude oil, inhalation of
airborne contaminants, or consumption of food or water contaminated
by either the crude oil or components of the crude oil. Keystone
agreed to remediate spills, restore the affected areas, and provide
alternative water supplies if a spill contaminates groundwater or
surface water. Keystone also agreed to develop communications directed
at bilingual communities, such as signage in both English and Spanish
languages, and emergency communications in both languages.

**ALTERNATIVES CONSIDERED**

DOS considered the following three major alternative scenarios: 

• No Action Alternative -- potential scenarios that could occur if
the proposed Project is not built and operated;

• System Alternatives − the use of other pipeline systems or other
methods of providing Canadian crude oil to the Cushing tank farm and
the Gulf Coast market;

• Major Route Alternatives − other potential pipeline routes for
transporting heavy crude oil from the U.S./Canada border to Cushing,
Oklahoma and the Gulf Coast market.

**No Action Alternative**

Under the No Action Alternative, the potential adverse and positive
impacts associated with building and operating the proposed Project
would not occur. However, there is an existing market demand for heavy
crude oil in the Gulf Coast area. The demand for crude oil in the Gulf
Coast area is projected to increase and refinery runs are projected
to grow over the next 10 years, even under a low demand outlook.

A report commissioned by the Department of Energy (DOE) indicated that
whether the proposed Project is built or not is unlikely to impact
the demand for heavy crude oil by the Gulf Coast refineries. Even if
improved fuel efficiency and broader adoption of alternative fuels
reduced overall demand for oil, demand for Canadian heavy crude oil
at Gulf Coast refineries would not be substantially affected.

At the same time, three of the four countries that are major crude
oil suppliers to Gulf Coast refineries currently face declining
or uncertain production horizons. As a result, those refineries
are expected to obtain increased volumes of heavy crude oil from
alternative sources in both the near term and further into the
future. Implementation of the No Action Alternative would not meet
this need.

If the proposed Project is not built and operated, Gulf Coast
refineries could obtain Canadian crude oil transported through other
new pipelines or by rail or truck transport. Other pipeline projects
have been proposed to transport Canadian crude oil to the Gulf Coast
area, and both rail transport and barge transport could be used to
meet a portion of the need. In addition, the Gulf Coast refineries
could obtain crude oil transported by marine tanker from areas outside
of North America. Many of the sources outside of North America are in
regions that are experiencing declining production or are not secure
and reliable sources of crude oil, including the Middle East, Africa,
Mexico, and South America.

As a result of these considerations, DOS does not regard the No Action
Alternative to be preferable to the proposed Project.

If the proposed Project is not implemented, Canadian producers would
seek alternative transportation systems to move oil to markets other
than the U.S. Several projects have been proposed to transport crude
oil out of using pipelines to Canadian ports.

Whether or not the proposed Project is implemented, Canadian producers
would seek alternative transportation systems to move oil to markets
other than the U.S. Several projects have been proposed to transport
crude oil out of the oil sands area of Alberta using pipelines to
Canadian ports.

**System Alternatives**

System alternatives would use combinations of existing or expanded
pipeline systems, pipeline systems that have been proposed or
announced, and non-pipeline systems such as tank trucks, railroad
tank cars, and barges and marine tankers to transport Canadian heavy
crude oil to Gulf Coast refineries.

None of the pipeline systems considered would be capable of
transporting Canadian crude oil to Gulf Coast delivery points in the
volumes required to meet Keystone's commitments for transporting
380,000 bpd to delivery points in Texas. Therefore they would not
meet the purpose of the proposed Project. A combination of the
pipeline systems considered could, over time, deliver volumes of
Canadian oil sands crude oil in volumes similar to the volumes that
would be transported by the proposed Project. However, that would
not meet the near-term need for heavy crude oil at the Gulf Coast
refineries. Expanding the pipeline systems that were considered to meet
the purpose of the proposed Project or construction of new components
or a combination of those systems would result in impacts similar to
those of the proposed Project.

The trucking alternative would add substantial congestion to highways
in all states along the route selected, particularly at and near the
border crossing and in the vicinity of the delivery points. At those
locations it is likely that there would be significant impacts to
the existing transportation systems. Trucking would also result in
substantially higher greenhouse gas emissions and a higher risk of
accidents than transport by pipeline. 

Development of a rail system to transport the volume of crude oil that
would be transported by the proposed Project would likely produce less
impact from construction than would the proposed Project because it
could be done using existing tracks. However, there would be greater
safety concerns and greater impacts during operation, including
higher energy use and greenhouse emissions, greater noise impacts,
and greater direct and indirect effects on many more communities than
the proposed Project.

As a result of these considerations as described in Section 4.2 of
the EIS, system alternatives were considered either not reasonable
or not environmentally preferable.

**Major Route Alternatives**

The analysis of route alternatives considered 14 major
route alternatives. Figure ES-8 depicts the alternative routes
considered. The analysis of alternatives routes was conducted following
the approach to assessments of alternative pipeline routes used by
the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission. As a result, the analysis
began with a screening process that first established criteria for
screening alternatives, then identified potential alternatives that met
the criteria, and determined whether or not they would (1) meet the
purpose of and need for the proposed Project, and (2) be technically
and economically practicable or feasible. For those alternatives
meeting the criteria, DOS assessed whether or not the alternative
offered an overall environmental advantage over the proposed route.

Due to public concern regarding the Ogallala Aquifer (Northern High
Plains Aquifer system) and the Sand Hills region, 5 of the alternative
routes were developed to either minimize the pipeline length over those
areas or avoid the areas entirely. These alternative routes consisted
of I-90 Corridor Alternatives A and B, Keystone Corridor Alternatives
1 and 2 (which are parallel to all or part of the route of the existing
Keystone Oil Pipeline System), and the Western Alternative.

The assessment considered the environmental characteristics of the
areas that these alternatives would cross, including the presence
of aquifers, the depth of wells, developed land, forested areas,
wetlands, and streams and rivers.

The Western Alternative was eliminated since it was financially
impracticable. Although the other four route alternatives could have
been eliminated based on consideration of economical and technical
practicability and feasibility without further evaluation, they
were nonetheless examined further with an emphasis on groundwater
resources. The I-90 Corridor and Keystone Corridor alternatives would
all avoid the Sand Hills; however, they would not avoid the Northern
High Plains Aquifer system, and they would not avoid areas of shallow
groundwater. Instead, these routes would shift risks to other areas
of the Northern High Plains Aquifer system and to other aquifers.

In addition, these alternatives would be longer than the proposed
route and would disturb more land and cross more water bodies than
the proposed route. In addition, I-90 Corridor Alternatives A and B
require crossing Lake Francis Case on the Missouri River which would
pose technical challenges due to the width of the reservoir and the
slope of the western side of the crossing area.

Keystone Corridor Alternatives 1 and 2 would cost about 25 percent more
than the proposed Project (about $1.7 billion more) and implementation
of either of those alternatives would compromise the Bakken Marketlink
Project and the opportunity to transport crude oil from the producers
in the Bakken formation to markets in Cushing and the Gulf Coast.

Based on the above considerations and as described in Section 4.3 of
the EIS, DOS eliminated the major potential route alternatives from
further consideration.

**Route Variations and Minor Realignments**

A route variation is a relatively short deviation from a proposed route
that replaces a segment of the proposed route. Variations are developed
to resolve landowner concerns and impacts to cultural resource sites,
wetlands, recreational lands, and terrain.

DOS consulted with the Bureau of Land Management and state agencies to
negotiate route variations and minor realignments, including nearly 100
in Montana and about 240 minor realignments in other states along the
proposed route. Additional route variations and minor realignments may
be added in response to specific conditions that may arise throughout
the construction process. 

**Figure ES-8 Major Route Alternatives** 

The variations and minor realignments would replace short segments
of the proposed Project, are relatively close to the proposed route,
and would be implemented in accordance with applicable regulatory
requirements of federal, state, or local permitting agencies. DOS
considers the variations and minor realignments selected to have been
evaluated sufficiently to meet the environmental review requirements
of the National Environmental Protection Act.

**Other Alternatives Considered**

DOS also considered several other scenarios in response to comments on
the draft EIS. The alternative pipeline designs considered consisted
of an aboveground pipeline and a smaller diameter pipe to decrease the
volume of oil released from a spill. DOS also considered alternative
sites for the major aboveground facilities of the proposed Project,
including pump stations, mainline valves, and the Cushing tank
farm. None of the alternative designs or facility locations were
considered safer or environmentally preferable to the proposed
Project design.

**Agency Preferred Alternative**

DOS did not find any of the major alternatives to be preferable
to the proposed Project for the reasons presented in the final EIS
and summarized above. As a result, the agency-preferred alternative
is the proposed Project route with the variations and minor route
realignments described in the EIS, and the proposed location of the
Cushing tank farm.

**ENVIRONMENTAL ANALYSES**

Four levels of impact duration were considered in the analysis
of potential environmental impacts due to construction and
normal operation of the proposed Project: temporary, short-term,
long-term, and permanent. Temporary impacts generally occur during
construction, with the resources returning to pre-construction
conditions almost immediately afterward. Short-term impacts could
continue for approximately 3 years after construction, and impacts
were considered long term if the resources would require more than
3 years to recover. Permanent impacts would occur if the resources
would not return to pre-construction conditions during the life of
the proposed Project, such as impacts to land use due to installation
of pump stations.

Conclusions in the EIS are based on the analysis of environmental
impacts and the understanding that:

• Keystone would comply with all applicable laws and regulations;

• The proposed Project would be constructed, operated, and maintained
as described in the EIS;

• Keystone has agreed to incorporate the 57 Project-specific Special
Conditions developed by PHMSA into the proposed Project;

• Keystone has agreed to implement the measures designed to avoid or
reduce impacts described in its application for a Presidential Permit
and supplemental filings with DOS, the measures in its Construction,
Mitigation, and Reclamation (CMR) Plan presented in Appendix B of the
EIS, and the construction methods for the Sand Hills region described
in Appendix H to the EIS; and

• Keystone would incorporate the mitigation measures required
in permits issued by environmental permitting agencies into the
construction, operation, and maintenance of the proposed Project.

**Environmental Justice**

Executive Order 12898 requires federal agencies to address and mitigate
potential adverse impacts to minority and low income populations. In
consultation with EPA, DOS identified these communities within a
4-mile-wide corridor centered on the pipeline using census and county
level data.

**Potential Construction Impacts:** The assessment suggested that
potential impacts to minority and low income populations could occur
primarily in Harris, Jefferson, and Angelina Counties in Texas and
in Lincoln County, Oklahoma. During construction, potential impacts
include exposure to increased dust and noise, disruption of traffic
patterns, and increased competition for social services in underserved
populations. At any given location along the proposed pipeline route,
the duration of the construction period would typically range from 20
to 30 working days. As a result, the impacts to minority and low-income
populations due to construction would be temporary and minor.

**Medical Services:** Areas along the pipeline route that are
medically underserved may be more vulnerable during construction
periods. These communities have been identified as Health Professional
Shortage Areas or Medically Underserved Areas/Populations. However,
construction-related disruptions in those areas would be temporary
and minor. In areas in 

Montana and South Dakota, minor medical needs of workers would be
handled in construction camps to avoid or minimize the need for
medical services from the surrounding communities.

**Air Emissions Related to Environmental Justice Issues:** The
refineries that are likely to receive oil transported by the pipeline
are already configured to process heavy crude oil, and in the future
would seek to continue processing heavy crude oil whether or not the
proposed pipeline is constructed. The analysis in the EIS, including
a DOE-commissioned study, indicates that the proposed Project would
not likely affect the overall quality or quantity of crude oil refined
in the Gulf Coast region, and, as a result, would not likely effect
refinery emissions.

**Greenhouse Gas Emissions**

DOS commissioned a detailed study of greenhouse gas life-cycle
emissions that compared Canadian oil sands crude with other selected
reference crudes. This study was a thorough review of recent scientific
literature on greenhouse gas life-cycle emissions for Canadian oil
sands crude including extraction, upgrading, transportation, refining,
and combustion.

The study's major conclusion was that, throughout its life cycle,
oil sands crude is, on average, more greenhouse gas intensive than the
crude oil it would replace in the U.S. However, the relative greenhouse
gas intensity varies depending on (1) study design factors, such as
the reference crudes selected for comparison with Canadian oil sands
crudes (e.g., 2005 U.S. average crude oil, Venezuelan Bachaquero,
Middle East Sour, and Mexican Heavy) and the timeframe selected, and
(2) study assumptions, such as the extraction method and the mix of
crudes that would be transported by the pipeline.

For example, the Department of Energy's National Environmental
Technology Lab (NETL) study indicated that the life-cycle greenhouse
gas emissions of gasoline produced from Canadian oil sands crude are
approximately 17 percent higher than gasoline from the 2005 average
mix of crude oil consumed in the U.S. The NETL study serves as a key
input for analyses conducted by EPA and DOE. In comparison, a study
conducted by TIAX, LLC, found that the greenhouse gas emissions from
gasoline produced from Canadian oil sands crude are only 2 percent
higher when compared to gasoline from Venezuelan heavy crude, a type of
crude oil that is similar to the crude oil that would be transported
by the proposed Project and is currently refined in large quantities
by Gulf Coast refineries.

The proposed Project is not likely to impact the amount of crude
oil produced from the oil sands. However, for illustrative purposes,
the DOS- commissioned study estimated that incremental life- cycle
U.S. greenhouse gas emissions from displacing reference crude oils with
Canadian oil sands crude oils imported through the proposed Project
would be between 3 and 21 million metric tons of carbon dioxide
emissions annually. This range is equivalent to annual greenhouse
gas emissions from the combustion of fuels in 588,000 to 4,061,000
passenger vehicles.

In addition, current projections suggest that the amount of energy
required to extract all crude oils is projected to increase over
time due to the need to extract oil from ever deeper reservoirs using
more energy intensive techniques. However, while the greenhouse gas
intensity of reference crude oils may trend upward, the projections
for the greenhouse gas intensity of Canadian oil sands crude oils
suggests that they may stay relatively constant. Although there is
some uncertainty in the trends for both reference crude oils and
oil sands derived crude oils, on balance it appears that the gap in
greenhouse gas intensity may decrease over time.

**Geology and Soils**

**Geologic Hazards:** Potential geologic hazards assessed in the EIS
include seismic hazards (earthquakes), landslides, or subsidence (sink
holes). The proposed route extends through relatively flat and stable
areas and the potential for these events is low. The pipeline would not
cross any known active faults with confirmed surface offsets. During
construction, land clearing could increase the risk of landslides
and erosion. Keystone agreed to construct temporary erosion control
systems and revegetate the right-of-way after construction.

There is a risk of subsidence (sink holes) where the proposed
route potentially crosses karst formations in Nebraska, Oklahoma,
and Texas. Site-specific studies would be conducted as necessary to
characterize the karst features, if they are encountered, and evaluate
and modify construction techniques as necessary in these areas. The
overall risk to the pipeline from karst-related subsidence is expected
to be minimal.

**Soils and Sediments:** Potential impacts to soils include soil
erosion, loss of topsoil, soil compaction, soil contamination, damage
to existing tile drainage 

systems, and permanent increases in the proportion of large rocks
in the topsoil. However, Keystone agreed to construction procedures
that are designed to reduce the likelihood and severity of Project
impacts to soils and sediments, including topsoil segregation methods,
and to mitigate impacts to the extent practicable.

**Sand Hills Region:** Of particular concern is the soil of the Sand
Hills region of Nebraska, which is particularly vulnerable to wind
erosion. To address this concern, Keystone developed and agreed
to construction, reclamation, and post-construction procedures
specifically for this area in consultation with local experts and
state agencies. The goal of the Sand Hills region reclamation plan
is to protect this sensitive area by maintaining soil structure
and stability, stabilizing slopes to prevent erosion, restoring
native grass species, and maintaining wildlife habitat and livestock
grazing areas. Keystone agreed to monitor the right-of-way through
the Sand Hills region for several years to ensure that reclamation
and revegetation efforts are successful.

**Water Resources**

**Groundwater:** Many of the aquifers along the proposed route are
isolated from the surface due to soil types above the aquifers that
prevent or slow downward migration of water. However, shallow or
near-surface aquifers are also present along the proposed route, as
discussed above. Construction of the proposed Project may result in
temporary to short- term increases in suspended solids in the shallow
aquifers. The risk of dewatering shallow groundwater aquifers during
construction or reducing groundwater quality due to increased sediments
in the water would be temporary to short term.

At some locations, groundwater may be used as a source of water for
pressure testing the pipeline during construction. Keystone must obtain
all applicable water withdrawal and discharge permits prior to testing,
and the test water would be tested and discharged in accordance with
permit requirements.

**River and Stream Crossings:** Surface water bodies would be
crossed using one of three methods: the open-cut wet method, the
dry-cut method, or the horizontal directional drilling method. The
method selected would be based on the characteristics of the crossing
location and the requirements of the permitting agencies.

The open-cut wet method, which involves trenching while the stream
is flowing, would result in temporary increases in turbidity and
bank erosion where vegetation is removed. The dry-cut method, which
involves diverting stream flow around the construction site, results
in lower increases in turbidity than the open-cut wet method.

Horizontal directional drilling would minimize impacts to the stream
or river because it involves drilling well below the streambed. This
method would be selected at large body crossings to avoid disturbing
the streambeds and streamflow and to reduce the potential that deep
scour during flooding would endanger pipeline integrity. Figure ES-9
presents a cross section of a river crossing using the horizontal
directional drilling method.

At all water crossings, Keystone agreed to use vegetative buffer
strips, drainage diversion structures, and sediment barriers, and
limit vegetation clearing to reduce siltation and erosion. After
construction, the right-of-way would be restored and revegetated to
reduce the potential for erosion of the stream bank.

**Hydrostatic Test Water:** Water used to pressure test the pipeline
during construction would be discharged to its source waters or to
an approved upland area within the same drainage and tested to ensure
it meets applicable water quality standards and discharge rates.

**Wetlands**

The proposed Project route crosses emergent, scrub/shrub, and
forested wetlands that are protected by the U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers (USACE) and applicable state agencies under the review of
EPA through Section 401 and 404 of the Clean Water Act. Specific
plans regarding wetland avoidance and minimization of impacts,
and the development of mitigation to compensate for the permanent
loss or conversion of forested to emergent wetlands would be further
developed during the permitting process. Wetland impacts presented in
the EIS represent preliminary estimates based on the best available
wetland information. DOS reviewed potential impacts to wetlands and
the avoidance, minimization, and mitigation process that would be
followed with USACE and EPA. 

**Figure ES-9**

**Cross Section of Horizontal Directional Drilling Method**

Most wetlands crossed by the proposed Project in Montana, South
Dakota, and Nebraska are emergent wetlands, and most wetlands
crossed by the proposed Project in Oklahoma and Texas are forested
wetlands. Construction of the pipeline would affect wetlands and
their functions primarily during and immediately after construction
activities, but permanent changes also are possible. Keystone
agreed to use construction methods that avoid or minimize impacts to
wetlands. These measures include installing trench breakers and/or
sealing the trench to maintain the original wetland hydrology to
avoid draining wetlands, using timber mats to protect wetlands during
construction, and restoring wetland areas to a level consistent with
the requirements of the applicable permits.

Most wetland vegetation communities would transition back into a
community that would function similarly to the previously undisturbed
wetland. Because most wetlands would be restored, the overall impact
of the proposed Project to wetlands would be minor to moderate and
would range in duration from short term to the life of the proposed
Project. However, some forested and scrub-shrub wetlands over the
pipeline would be converted to herbaceous wetlands since trees and
shrubs would not be allowed to grow over the pipeline for inspection
and integrity purposes. Keystone is working with each USACE district
along the proposed route to identify wetlands and to develop wetland
mitigation and compensation plans for the permanent conversion of
forested wetland to herbaceous wetland.

**Texas Bottomland Hardwood Wetlands:** These are forested wetlands
with trees, such as Bald Cypress, Water Oak, Water Hickory, and
Swamp Tupelo that can exist in lowland floodplains in the Gulf Coast
states. Clearing bottomland hardwood trees during construction
would result in long-term to permanent impacts because forests
require decades to re- establish and would mature over the span
of centuries. DOS reviewed potential Project impacts on bottomland
hardwood wetlands with EPA and USACE. Preliminary mitigation measures
to protect bottomland hardwood wetlands are discussed in the EIS and
would be developed further by the USACE during the wetland permitting
process.

**Figure ES-10**

**Texas Bottomland Hardwood Wetland** 

**Terrestrial Vegetation**

The proposed Project crosses primarily grasslands and rangelands,
followed by croplands, upland forests, developed lands, and
wetlands. After construction, Keystone agreed to restore topsoil,
slopes, contours, and drainage patterns to preconstruction conditions
as practicable and to reseed disturbed areas to restore vegetation
cover, prevent erosion, and control noxious weeds. Keystone committed
to controlling the introduction and spread of noxious weeds and pests
by adhering to construction and restoration procedures recommended
by local, state, and federal agencies. Soils and vegetation over the
pipeline would be warmed slightly compared to surrounding soils by
heat loss from the pipeline during operation.

**Native Grasslands and Rangelands:** Native mixed shrub rangelands
would be crossed by the proposed Project in Montana and South Dakota
and native grasslands would be crossed by the proposed Project in the
Sand Hills region in Nebraska. Both of these native prairie habitats
would be challenging to reclaim. In recognition of these challenges,
Keystone developed specific construction and reclamation methods for
the proposed Project in consultation with local, state, and federal
agencies and local experts to ensure that sagebrush and native grasses
are restored to rangelands in Montana and South Dakota and that fragile
soils and diverse native vegetation cover are re-established in the
Sand Hills region of Nebraska.

**Figure ES-11 Sand Hills Grassland**

**Upland and Riparian Forests:** Native forests, especially forested
floodplains, were once an integral component of the landscape
throughout the Great Plains and they provide important habitats for
wildlife. Clearing trees in upland and riparian forest communities
would result in long-term impacts because trees would be required
to remain outside of the 50-foot-wide permanent right-of-way. These
impacts would last throughout the life of the proposed Project
because trees would not be allowed to reestablish within the permanent
right-of-way and because forests require decades to re-establish and
would mature over the span of centuries.

**Wildlife**

Big game animals, small game animals and furbearers, waterfowl and
game birds, and other nongame animals use habitats in and around the
six states crossed by the proposed Project. Construction would result
in the temporary and permanent loss and alteration of habitats which
provide foraging, cover, and breeding habitats for wildlife. Most
habitat loss would be temporary as vegetation cover would be re-
established after construction and would be small in context to
habitats available throughout the region crossed by the proposed
Project. Loss of shrublands and wooded habitats would be long-term
(from 5 to 20 years or more), however; and trees and tall shrubs
would not be allowed to re-establish over the pipeline for inspection
and integrity purposes. Aboveground facilities would result in some
permanent habitat loss. Power lines to pump stations can provide
vantage perches for raptors that lead to increased predation on
ground nesting birds and small mammals. Construction can produce
short-term barriers to wildlife movement, direct and indirect
mortality, and reduced survival and reproduction. Disturbance from
construction activities may have moderate local affects on wildlife
if important remnant habitats are crossed or when sensitive breeding
or overwintering periods are not avoided. Habitat alteration and
fragmentation caused by the pipeline right-of-way may reduce habitat
suitability and use by wildlife.

Construction could also produce short-term barriers to wildlife
movement, direct and indirect mortality, and reduced survival and
reproduction. Disturbance from construction activities would have
moderate local affects on wildlife if important remnant habitats are
crossed or when sensitive breeding or overwintering periods are not
avoided. Habitat alteration and fragmentation caused by construction
of the pipeline could reduce habitat suitability and use by wildlife.

During the environmental review of the proposed Project, state and
federal wildlife management agencies were contacted and they provided
information on sensitive seasons and wildlife habitats such as big
game overwintering habitats, important riparian corridors, and raptor
and other migratory bird 

nesting habitats. In addition state and federal wildlife management
agencies provided recommendations for surveys to more specifically
locate areas such as raptor nests and prairie dog colonies that could
potentially be avoided. Keystone is working with state and federal
wildlife management agencies to minimize impacts to wildlife during
sensitive breeding periods. Measures developed to minimize impacts to
wildlife include development of a Migratory Bird Conservation Plan in
consultation with the USFWS, removal of litter and garbage that could
attract wildlife, control of unauthorized off-road vehicle access to
the construction right-of-way, and reclamation of native range with
native seed mixes. Overall, the impact of construction to wildlife
is expected to be minor and would be primarily temporary to short
term. Normal Project operation would result in negligible effects
to wildlife.

**Figure ES-12 Mule Deer**

Keystone must work with state and federal wildlife management
agencies to minimize impacts to wildlife during sensitive breeding
periods. Overall, the impact of construction to wildlife is expected
to be minor and would be primarily temporary to short term. Normal
Project operation would result in negligible effects to wildlife.

**Fisheries Resources**

The proposed route would cross rivers and streams, including perennial
streams that support recreational or commercial fisheries. Most
potential impacts to fisheries resources would occur during
construction and would be temporary to short term. Potential impacts
from construction of stream crossings include siltation, sedimentation,
bank erosion, sediment deposition, short-term delays in movements
of fish, and transport and spread of aquatic invasive animals and
plants. Keystone has agreed to minimize vehicle contact with surface
waters and to clean equipment to prevent transportation of aquatic
invasive animals and plants on equipment.

Most streams would be crossed using one of several trenching
methods. Trenching stream crossings when water is still flowing through
the stream bed can result in destruction of fish that do not avoid
the construction area. Trenching methods may also use dams, pumps, and
flumes to divert the stream flow around the trench location to allow a
"dry" trenching method. However, direct disturbance to the stream bed
can release fine sediments during construction through flowing waters
or after the flow is returned to the stream bed. Sediment would be
transported downstream and could affect fish, other aquatic life, and
aquatic habitats through either direct exposure or smothering. Most
stream crossings would be completed in less than 2 days, grading and
disturbance to waterbody banks would be minimized, and crossings would
be timed to avoid sensitive spawning periods, such that resulting steam
bed disturbance and sediment impacts would be temporary and minor.

Most large rivers would be crossed using the horizontal directional
drilling method which would install the pipeline well below the
active river bed. As a result, direct disturbance to the river
bed, fish, aquatic animals and plants, and river banks would be
avoided. Keystone has developed site specific plans for horizontal
directional drill crossings and has agreed to develop site-specific
contingency plans to address unintended releases of drilling fluids
that include preventative measures and a spill response plan.

**Figure ES-13 Recreational Fishing** 

**Threatened and Endangered Species**

The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS) is responsible for
protecting threatened and endangered species under the Endangered
Species Act (ESA). Federally-protected threatened or endangered
species that are known or thought to be in the vicinity of the
proposed Project include three mammals, five birds, one amphibian,
five reptiles, three fish, two invertebrates, and four plants. DOS
prepared a Biological Assessment and consulted with USFWS to evaluate
the proposed Project's potential impact on federally-protected
threatened or endangered species.

USFWS has determined that the proposed Project would have no affect
on 12 of the listed species, and may affect, but is not likely to
adversely affect 10 of those species. These evaluations are based on
species occurrence and conservation measures developed in consultation
with USFWS that Keystone has agreed to implement. DOS and USFWS
determined that the proposed Project would likely adversely affect
the American burying beetle and a formal consultation was initiated
to determine whether impacts could jeopardize the continued existence
of the species and to further develop conservation measures and an
incidental take statement. Based on the formal consultation, USFWS
is formulating a Biological Opinion that would be required prior
to the issuance of a Record of Decision by DOS or any other federal
cooperating agency.

Direct impacts to beetles could occur due to habitat loss,
construction, and pre-construction conservation measures (where beetles
would be trapped and relocated away from the project area). During
operation, the flow of oil through the pipeline would generate heat
that would warm the surrounding soils and could affect beetles during
the winter when they bury themselves in the soil to hibernate. During
formal consultation with the USFWS, conservation measures were
developed that include Keystone providing funding for conservation
efforts and monitoring of American burying beetle habitat restoration,
and the establishment of a performance bond for supplemental habitat
reclamation if initial reclamation efforts are unsuccessful.

Several candidate species for federal protection under the ESA
are known or thought to be in the vicinity of the proposed Project
including three birds, one reptile, one fish, and two plants. Measures
that have been developed to avoid and minimize potential impacts to
these species include reclamation of native range with native seed
mixes, development of a

Migratory Bird Conservation Plan in consultation with USFWS, and
development of greater sage-grouse mitigation implementation plans
for Montana and South Dakota in consultation with state and federal
agencies.

**Figure ES-14 American Burying Beetle**

A total of 35 state-protected species may also be present along
the proposed right-of-way. These species have been designated by
state wildlife management agencies as being of concern to assist
with conservation planning and maintenance of the state's natural
heritage. Conservation measures developed in consultation with state
agencies include conducting additional species-specific surveys to
determine whether nests, dens, or suitable habitats are present
along the proposed right-of-way; adhering to construction timing
restrictions to avoid the breeding, denning, and spawning seasons;
and reducing the width of the construction right-of-way in areas
where state-protected plant populations have been identified.

**Cultural Resources**

DOS, in coordination with consulting parties, has minimized the
potential for adverse effects to historic properties along the
Area of Potential Effect (APE) of the proposed Project by the
development of avoidance and mitigation measures. Since 2008,
DOS has consulted with Indian tribes, State Historic Preservation
Officers, federal agencies and local agencies under Section 106 of
the National Historic Preservation Act. As part of this effort, DOS
initially contacted over 95 Indian tribes to find out their level of
interest in becoming a consulting party. DOS also conducted Section
106 government-to-government consultation with the consulting parties
for the proposed Project. DOS also invited the consulting tribes to
prepare Traditional Cultural Property studies as part of the lead
agency responsibilities for the 

identification, evaluation and mitigation of historic properties.

A Programmatic Agreement was developed by DOS and the parties. The
Programmatic Agreement establishes a procedure for the further
identification, evaluation, mitigation, and treatment of historic
properties and will be completed prior to construction of the
proposed Project. The Advisory Council on Historic Preservation
participated in the development of this agreement with DOS and
the other consulting parties. As part of this agreement, a Tribal
Monitoring Plan and a Historic Trails and Archaeological Monitoring
Plan were also developed. If previously unidentified archaeological
sites are encountered during construction of the proposed Project,
Keystone, DOS, and the consulting parties would follow the procedures
described in the Unanticipated Discovery Plans.

**Air Quality and Noise**

**Air Quality:** Air quality impacts from construction would include
emissions from construction equipment, temporary fuel transfer systems,
fuel storage tanks, and dust and smoke from open burning. Most of
these emissions would occur only intermittently, would be limited
to active construction areas, and would be controlled to the extent
required by state and local agencies.

All pump stations will be electrically powered by local utility
providers. As a result, during normal operation there would be minor
emissions from valves and pumping equipment at the pump stations. There
would also be low levels of emissions from mobile sources, and low
levels of emissions from the proposed Cushing tank farm and the
surge relief systems at the delivery points. The proposed Project
would not cause or contribute to a violation of any federal, state,
or local air quality standards and it would not require a Clean Air
Act Title V operating permit.

The proposed Project would cross five counties where the background
concentration of ozone is greater than the national ambient air
quality standards. Those areas are designated as nonattainment for
the federal 8-hour ozone standard. However, the emissions from the
proposed Project would be consistent with state implementation plans
for air quality issues.

**Noise:** During construction there would be intermittent, temporary,
and localized increases in sound levels as construction activities
move through an area. To reduce construction noise impacts,

Keystone agreed to limit the hours during which activities with
high-decibel noise levels are conducted in residential areas, require
noise mitigation procedures, monitor sound levels, and develop site-
specific mitigation plans to comply with regulations. As a result,
the potential noise impacts associated with construction would be
minor and temporary.

During operation, sound levels within 2,300 feet of pump stations
would increase. Outside of this distance, noise levels would remain
at existing sound levels. Keystone committed to performing a noise
assessment survey and to mitigating identified impacts by installing
noise reducing measures at the pump stations.

**Land Use, Recreation, and Visual Resources**

The majority of land that would be affected by the project is privately
owned (21,333 acres) with nearly equal amounts of state (582 acres)
and federal (579 acres) lands being impacted.

**Agriculture:** After construction, nearly all agricultural land
and rangeland along the right-of-way would be allowed to return
to production with little impact on production levels in the
long term. However, there would be restrictions on growing woody
vegetation and installing structures within the 50-foot-wide permanent
right-of-way. Keystone has agreed to compensate landowners for crop
losses on a case- by-case basis.

There are 102 tracts of land that would be impacted which are part
of the Conservation Reserve Program. The proposed Project is not
expected to affect landowner ability to participate in that program.

Keystone agreed to use construction measures designed to reduce
impacts to existing land uses, such as topsoil protection, avoiding
interference with irrigation systems except when necessary, reducing
construction time in irrigated areas, repairing or restoring drain
tiles, restoring disturbed areas with custom seed mixes to match the
native plants, providing access to rangeland during construction,
installing temporary fences with gates around construction areas to
prevent injury to livestock or workers, providing trench crossing
areas to allow livestock and wildlife to cross the trench safely,
and controlling noise and dust control.

**Recreation:** Operation of the proposed Project would not affect
recreational resources, national or state parks, or users of those
resources. Keystone has committed to cooperating with private
landowners, and with federal, state, and local agencies to reduce 

the conflict between recreational users and Project construction.

**Visual Resources:** During construction, there would be visual
impacts associated activities along the proposed right-of-way such
as clearing, trenching, pipe storage, and installing above-ground
structures. Most of the visual impacts of the pipeline corridor in
agricultural and rangeland areas would be substantially reduced with
restoration and revegetation. Keystone agreed to install vegetative
buffers around the pump stations to reduce the visual impacts of those
facilities. Overall, the visual impacts of the proposed Project would
generally be minor to moderate.

**Socioeconomics**

During construction, there would be temporary, positive socioeconomic
impacts as a result of local employment, taxes on worker income,
spending by construction workers, and spending on construction
goods and services. The construction work force would consist of
approximately 5,000 to 6,000 workers, including Keystone employees,
contractor employees, and construction and environmental inspection
staff. That would generate from $349 million to $419 in total wages. An
estimated $6.58 to $6.65 billion would be spent on materials and
supplies, easements, engineering, permitting, and other costs.

Adverse impacts during construction could include temporary
and minor increases in the need for public services, disruption
of local transportation corridors, and reduced availability of
transient housing. Keystone would establish four temporary work
camps in southeastern Montana and northwestern South Dakota to
minimize impacts to transient housing and public services in those
areas. Operation of the proposed Project would also result in long-term
to permanent beneficial socioeconomic impacts, including employment
and income benefits resulting from long-term hires and local operating
expenditures, and increased property tax revenues. An estimated $140.5
million in annual property tax revenues would be generated by the
proposed Project.

**Cumulative Impacts**

The analysis of cumulative impacts combined the potential impacts of
the proposed Project with the impacts of past, present, and reasonably
foreseeable future actions in the vicinity of the proposed route. This
assessment included consideration of the many existing pipelines,
electrical transmission lines, and roadways, as well as other linear
projects that are under construction, planned, proposed, or reasonably
foreseeable in the vicinity of the proposed route. The analysis also
included existing and likely energy development projects.

During construction, the proposed Project would contribute to
cumulative dust and noise generation, loss of vegetation or crop cover,
and minor localized traffic disruptions where other linear projects
are under construction at the same time and are in the vicinity of
the proposed route.

One of the primary contributions to cumulative effects during operation
would be emissions from storage tanks. However, the proposed Project
and all other petroleum storage projects would have to comply with
the emissions limitations of air quality permits. In addition, where
Project-related aboveground facilities and visible corridors are
present along with those of other projects, there would be cumulative
effects to visual resources. Other cumulative impacts associated with
operation include changes in land use, terrestrial vegetation, wetland
function, and wildlife habitat, as well as increases in tax revenues,
and employment. Where the pump stations or compressor stations of
other pipeline systems are in the vicinity of the pump stations for
the proposed Project, there would also be cumulative noise impacts.

An increase in the development of wind power projects in the central
plains region as well as increased need for electrical power is likely
to increase the number of electrical transmission lines in the vicinity
of the proposed route. If the construction of power distribution or
transmission lines in the vicinity of the proposed route overlaps with
construction of the proposed Project, short-term cumulative impacts
associated with noise, dust, and general construction activity could
occur. Likely cumulative impacts of the proposed Project and operation
of new transmission lines include viewshed degradation, changes to
land uses and vegetation, and impacts to birds.

**Environmental Impacts in Canada**

An evaluation of the impacts resulting from extraction of crude oil
from the oil sands in Canada is outside of the scope of analysis
required under the National Environmental Policy Act. However,
in response to comments and as a DOS policy decision, the general
regulatory oversight and the environmental impacts in 

Canada related to oil sands production were summarized in the EIS.

The potential environmental effects of the proposed Project have been
assessed on both sides of the international border. In March 2010, the
National Energy Board of Canada determined that the proposed Keystone
XL Project is needed to meet the present and future public convenience
and necessity, provided that the Board's terms and conditions presented
in the project certificate are met. The Board's assessment included
evaluations of need, economic feasibility, potential commercial
impacts, potential environmental and socioeconomic effects,
appropriateness of the general route of the pipeline, potential
impacts on Aboriginal interests, and other issues.

Oil sands development projects undergo an environmental review in
Canada under Alberta's

Environmental Protection and Enhancement Act and other environmental
regulations. Other federal and provincial agencies may participate in
the review as Responsible Authorities or as Federal Authorities with
specialist advice. Government regulators of oil sands activities in
Canada are working to manage and provide regional standards for air
quality, land impact, and water quality and consumption based on a
cumulative effects approach.

Oil sands mining projects have reduced greenhouse gas emissions
intensity by an average of 39 percent between 1990 and 2008 and
are working toward further reductions. In addition, the Alberta
Land Stewardship Act supports the Land-use Framework, which includes
province-wide strategies for establishing monitoring systems, promoting
efficient use of lands, reducing impact of human activities, and
including aboriginal people in land-use planning. 