ES.1 **INTRODUCTION**

**ES.1.1 Overview**

The proposed Keystone XL Pipeline is a new 875-mile pipeline
infrastructure project that would allow delivery of up to 830,000
barrels per day (bpd) of crude oil from Alberta, Canada, and the
Bakken Shale Formation in the United States to Steele City, Nebraska
for onward delivery to Cushing, Oklahoma, and refineries in the Gulf
Coast area1

1 The Gulf Coast area refers to the region from Houston, Texas,
to Lake Charles, Louisiana.

. TransCanada Keystone Pipeline, LP (Keystone) has applied for a
Presidential Permit which, if granted, would authorize the proposed
pipeline to cross the United States-Canadian border.

For proposed petroleum pipelines that cross international borders
of the United States, the President, through Executive Order 13337,
directs the Secretary of State to decide whether a project is in the
"national interest" before granting a Presidential Permit. The national
interest determination by the U.S. Department of State (the Department)
involves consideration of many factors, including energy security;
environmental, cultural, and economic impacts; foreign policy; and
compliance with relevant federal regulations. Before making such a
decision, the Department also asks for the views of the Departments of
Energy, Defense, Transportation, Homeland Security, Justice, Interior,
and Commerce, and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.

*Background*

Previously, Keystone submitted an application for the same border
crossing, but with a pipeline route in the United States that
differed from the route that is currently proposed. The biggest
difference in the previous route compared to the current one is that
it went through the Sand Hills Region of Nebraska as identified
by the Nebraska Department of Environmental Quality (NDEQ). A
separate Environmental Impact Statement was issued in August 2011
for that route. In November 2011, the Department determined that
additional information was needed to fully evaluate the application,
in particular, additional information about alternative routes within
Nebraska that would avoid the Sand Hills Region. In late December
2011, Congress adopted a provision of the Temporary Payroll Tax
Cut Continuation Act that sought to require the President to make a
decision on the Presidential Permit for that route within 60 days. That
deadline did not allow sufficient time to prepare a thorough, rigorous,
and transparent review of an alternative route through Nebraska. As
such, the Presidential Permit was denied.

In February 2012, Keystone informed the Department that it considered
the Gulf Coast portion of the previous pipeline project (from Cushing,
Oklahoma, to the Gulf Coast area) to have independent economic
utility and indicated it intended to proceed with construction of
that pipeline as a separate project, the Gulf Coast Project. The Gulf
Coast Project does not require a Presidential Permit because it does
not cross an international border. Construction on the Gulf Coast
Project is underway.

On May 4, 2012, Keystone filed a Presidential Permit application for
a new Keystone XL Project. The proposed Project has a new route and
a new stated purpose. The route in Montana and South Dakota would be
largely unchanged from the route analyzed in August 2011. However,
the newly proposed route not only avoids the NDEQ-identified Sand
Hills Region but also terminates at Steele City, Nebraska, and thus
is approximately half the length of the previously proposed project
analyzed in 2011. In other words, the newly proposed Project is 509
miles shorter than the previously proposed project analyzed in 2011.

*About the Draft Supplemental Environmental Impact Statement*

The Department has issued this draft Supplemental Environmental
Impact Statement (draft Supplemental EIS) that builds on the analysis
completed in August 2011 (the Final Environmental Impact Statement or
Final EIS). The analysis has been revised, expanded, and updated to
include a comprehensive review of the new route in Nebraska as well as
any significant new circumstances or information that is now available
on the largely unchanged route through Montana and South Dakota.

In completing the draft Supplemental EIS, the Department took into
consideration the comments contained in more than 400,000 e-mails,
letters, and other communications submitted throughout the scoping
process by public citizens, government agencies, Tribal governments,
and interested non- governmental organizations as well as over one
million e-mails, letters, and other communications submitted to
the Department during its consideration of the previous Keystone
XL application.

Expanded and new analyses include, among others: economic effects
of the proposed project, impacts from potential releases or spills,
impacts related to climate change, and cumulative effects from the
proposed project in combination with other projects. The Department
re-examined and expanded the evaluation of project alternatives,
including a reasonable route alternative and other scenarios of crude
oil transport, such as rail. The Department also updated the analysis
of the relationship of the proposed project to crude oil markets in
light of developments since August 2011, which includes an update to
the assessment of whether the proposed Project is likely to impact
the extraction rate from the oil sands in Canada, and thus impact
greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions associated with that extraction.

The Executive Summary on the following pages briefly presents the
contents of the draft Supplemental EIS, including the purpose and need
of the proposed Project, key potential impacts, measures to reduce
or mitigate those impacts if a permit was granted, and alternatives
to the proposed Project.

**ES.1.2 Project Description**

The proposed Keystone XL Pipeline Project consists of a 36-inch
pipeline and related facilities that would allow for transport of up to
830,000 bpd of crude oil from the Western Canadian Sedimentary Basin
(WCSB) in Alberta, Canada, and from the Williston Basin (Bakken)
region in Montana and North Dakota, primarily to refineries in the
Gulf Coast area. There is existing demand for crude oil, particularly
heavy crude oil at refiners in the Gulf Coast area, but the ultimate
disposition of crude oil transported by the proposed Project, and any
refined products produced from that crude oil, would be determined
by future market forces.

This draft Supplemental EIS evaluates the 875-mile pipeline that would
stretch from the U.S.-Canadian border near Morgan, Montana, to the
existing Keystone pipeline in Steele City, Nebraska. As noted above,
the draft Supplemental EIS builds on and supplements the analysis
completed in August in 2011 by specifically addressing the new route
in Nebraska as well as any significant new information that has since
become available.

**Figure ES-1: Proposed Keystone XL Project**

**ES.1.3 Alternatives**

In addition to minor route variations and pipeline design options,
the draft Supplemental EIS considers the following alternatives to
the proposed Project.

• **The No Action Alternative** evaluates scenarios that are likely
to occur if the proposed Project is not built, including rail and
vessel-based options for transporting WCSB and Bakken crude oil to
the Gulf Coast.

• **Major Route Alternatives** evaluate the impacts of changing
the route of the pipeline. Specific alternatives include the route
previously proposed as well as a route that parallels Interstate 90
in South Dakota before joining the right-of-way (ROW) of the existing
Keystone pipeline.

**ES.1.4 Findings**

Chapter 4 of the draft Supplemental EIS gives detailed findings
about the proposed Project's impacts. Among these are resources
where impacts could potentially be substantial, or that have been the
focus of significant public attention and comment. These key resource
areas include:

• Soils (including sandy and erodible soils);

• Groundwater, including aquifers such as the Ogallala Aquifer;

• Surface water resources;

• Socioeconomics, including the potential job and revenue benefits of
the proposed Project, as well as concerns about environmental justice;

• Lifecycle GHG emissions associated with oil sands development,
refining, and consumption; and

• Potential releases or spills.

ES.2 **CONTEXT**

**ES.2.1 Purpose and Need**

The Department must determine if the proposed Project is in the
national interest pursuant to Executive Order 13337. The Department
evaluates the proposed Project's purpose and need consistent with
the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA).

According to the application submitted by Keystone, the primary purpose
of the proposed Project is to provide the infrastructure to transport
heavy crude oil from the border with Canada to delivery points in
the United States by connecting to existing pipeline facilities near
Steele City, Nebraska. The proposed Project is meant to respond to
the market demand of refineries for heavy crude oil. The proposed
Project would also provide transportation for light crude oil from
the Bakken in North Dakota and Montana (as well as from Canada).

The proposed Project would have the capacity to deliver up to
830,000 bpd. Keystone has represented that it has firm commitments to
transport approximately 555,000 bpd of heavy crude oil from producers
in the WCSB. In addition, Keystone has represented that it has firm
commitments to transport 65,000 bpd of crude oil from the Bakken of
the 100,000 bpd of capacity set aside on the proposed Project for that
purpose. The ultimate mixture and quantity of crude oils transported
by the proposed Project over its lifetime would be determined by
future market forces.

**ES.2.2 Crude Oil Overview**

Oil producers send a variety of crude oils to refiners to produce
consumer products such as gasoline, diesel fuel for trucks, heating
oil, and raw materials for plastics and medicines. Each U.S. refinery
has different "hardware"--- equipment and capacity, metallurgy,
and treating processes---and different resulting mixes of finished
products.

The proposed Project would primarily transport crude oil from the
WCSB and Bakken regions. The majority of the oil from WCSB sources is
considered a heavy crude oil, while Bakken crude is considered a light
crude oil. In general, refineries in the Gulf Coast area are designed
to process a mixture of heavy and light crudes. The refineries in
that region possess one of the highest concentrations of heavy-crude
refining capacity of any area in the world. Gulf Coast refiners use
both domestic crude oil produced in the United States, and crude oil
imported from foreign countries to create various petroleum products.

The crude oil from the WCSB is produced as a viscous material, known
as raw bitumen, that has the consistency of soft asphalt. Due to its
viscosity, bitumen cannot be transported by pipeline on its own. It
first must be mixed with a petroleum-based product (called a diluent),
such as naphtha or natural gas condensate, to make a less viscous
liquid called dilbit; or it must be upgraded (partially refined) to
a medium weight crude oil called "synthetic crude oil." If diluents
are not available, producers use synthetic crude oil as the diluent
to create a product called synbit. The proposed Project is expected
to carry predominantly either dilbit, synbit, or both, as well as
synthetic crude oil and light crude oil produced from the Bakken.

**ES.2.3 Market Overview**

Refiners determine the optimal crudes to process similar to other
manufacturing companies that select the right raw materials to
manufacture products. Refining companies pay market prices for crude
oil, and measure their profitability based on selling their product
into the wholesale market. They then use that margin (the difference
between the price of crude and the price of the refined products)
to cover their expenses and generate profits. Refiners may select a
more expensive crude oil if that crude oil's yield provides a greater
margin than a cheaper crude oil.

The proposed Project seeks to capitalize on the demands of refiners
for a stable supply of both heavy and light crude oil. Refineries
in the Gulf Coast rely mostly on foreign imports, particularly from
Venezuela and Mexico, as well as from other countries. However,
the volume of crude exports from Mexico is declining. The long-term
contracts supporting the proposed Project indicate that refiners see
economic advantages to processing heavy WCSB crude oil as well as the
domestically produced Bakken light crude oil, which are both growing
in supply and may be less expensive to transport to the refinery than
imported crude oils that are shipped by tanker. A detailed analysis
of the market is presented in the Supplemental EIS and discussed
further in the Market Analysis section of this Executive Summary.

ES.3 **EIS DEVELOPMENT PROCESS**

**ES.3.1 Presidential Permitting Process**

For proposed petroleum pipelines that cross international borders
of the United States, the President, through Executive Order 13337,
directs the Secretary of State to decide whether a project is in the
national interest. If the proposed Project is determined to be in the
national interest, it is granted a Presidential Permit that authorizes
the construction, operation, and maintenance of the facilities at
the border between the United States and Canada. The Department's
jurisdiction does not extend to cover selection of pipeline routes
within the United States. The draft Supplemental EIS was produced
consistent with NEPA and will help inform that determination.

The National Interest Determination (or NID) involves consideration of
many factors, including energy security; environmental, cultural, and
economic impacts; foreign policy; and compliance with relevant federal
regulations. Before making such a decision, the Department seeks the
views of the eight federal agencies identified in Executive Order
13337: the Departments of Energy, Defense, Transportation, Homeland
Security, Justice, Interior, and Commerce, and the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency. The Department is also soliciting public input on
the draft Supplemental EIS.

**ES.3.2 Supplemental EIS Process**

In September 2012, Keystone submitted an Environmental Report in
support of its Presidential Permit application providing an update
of the impacts of the proposed Project and describing several
modifications to the originally proposed pipeline route to reduce
environmental impacts, improve constructability, and in response to
agency and public comments.

To assist in preparing the draft Supplemental EIS, the Department
retained an environmental consulting firm, Environmental Resources
Management, Inc. (ERM). ERM was selected pursuant to the Department's
interim guidance on the selection of independent third-party
contractors. ERM works at the sole and exclusive instruction of the
Department and is not permitted to communicate with Keystone unless
specifically directed to do so by Department officials. Preparation
of the draft Supplemental EIS

occurred over a 5-month period and included consultation with ERM,
cooperating agencies, scientists, and engineers with expertise in
key areas of concern related to the proposed Project.

This draft Supplemental EIS describes potential impacts of the
proposed Project and alternatives, including direct, indirect, and
cumulative impacts. It builds on the work done in the 2011 Final
EIS, including references to that document throughout the text
where appropriate. The Supplemental EIS includes an analysis of the
modified route in Nebraska, as well as analysis of any significant
new circumstances or information that has become available since the
August 2011 publication of the Final EIS for the previously proposed
project. This draft Supplemental EIS also relies, where appropriate,
on the data presented and the analyses done in the Final EIS for the
previously proposed project, because much of the proposed pipeline
route remains unchanged from its August 2011 publication. Finally, the
draft Supplemental EIS also includes the latest available information
on the proposed Project resulting from ongoing discussions with
federal, state, and local agencies.

ES.4 **PROJECT DESCRIPTION**

**ES.4.1 Keystone XL Project**

The proposed Project consists of a crude oil pipeline and related
facilities to transport WCSB crude oil from an oil supply hub near
Hardisty, Alberta, Canada, to existing pipeline facilities near Steele
City, Nebraska, for onward delivery to Cushing, Oklahoma, and the Gulf
Coast area. The proposed Project would also transport domestically
produced Bakken crude oil from a terminal near Baker, Montana, to
the existing Keystone Pipeline system at Steele City, Nebraska.

The Steele City delivery point provides access to the existing
Keystone Cushing Extension pipeline, which delivers crude oil to
Cushing, Oklahoma, where there is access to other pipeline systems
and terminals, including those serving the Gulf Coast area. The
proposed Project would consist of approximately 875 miles of new,
36-inch-diameter pipeline across portions of Montana, South Dakota, and
Nebraska (an additional 329 miles of pipeline in Canada were evaluated
by the Canadian government). Figure ES-2 depicts the proposed Project
in the United States.

**Figure ES-2: Proposed Project Overview**

**Figure ES-3: Keystone XL, Typical Pipeline Construction Sequence**

Construction of the proposed Project would generally require a
110-foot-wide, temporary ROW, and a variety of aboveground ancillary
facilities. Figure ES-3 illustrates the construction sequence that
would be followed for the proposed Project.

If permitted, when in operation, the proposed Project would maintain
a 50-foot, permanent easement over the pipeline. Keystone would have
access to property within the easement, but property owners would
retain the ability to farm and conduct other activities. The remaining
aboveground ancillary facilities would include 20 electrically operated
pump stations (two of which would be built along existing sections
of the Keystone Cushing Extension pipeline in Kansas), 44 mainline
valves, and 38 permanent access roads.2

2 Locations for access roads in Nebraska have not yet been determined
and are not included in this total.

The overall proposed Project is estimated to cost approximately $3.3
billion in the United States. If permitted, it would begin operation
in 2015, with the actual date dependent on the necessary permits,
approvals, and authorizations.

**ES.4.2 Changes Since the Final EIS**

The proposed pipeline route in the United States that is the subject
of this draft Supplemental EIS is similar to part of the previous
project evaluated in the August 2011 Final EIS. The newly proposed
route in Montana and South Dakota would be largely unchanged, except
for minor modifications Keystone made to improve constructability and
in response to comments, such as landowner requests to adjust the route
across their property. The new proposed route is 509 miles shorter
than the previously proposed route; however, it would be approximately
21 miles longer in Nebraska to avoid sensitive areas including the
NDEQ-identified Sand Hills Region. Thus, the newly proposed route is
substantially different from the previous route analyzed in August
2011 in two significant ways: it avoids the NDEQ-identified Sand
Hills Region and it terminates at Steele City, Nebraska.

**Figure ES-4: Sand Hills Grassland**

As shown in Figure ES-5, the proposed Project route in Nebraska is
substantially different from the previously proposed route analyzed
in the 2011 Final EIS.

**Figure ES-5: Comparison of Proposed Project** **Route to Previously
Proposed Project Segment**

In addition to the NDEQ-identified Sand Hills Region, the proposed
Project route would avoid areas in Keya Paha County identified by the
NDEQ that have soil and topographic characteristics similar to the
Sand Hills Region, and it avoids or moves further away from wellhead
protection areas for the Villages of Clarks and Western.

**ES.4.3 Connected Actions**

Connected actions are projects that would not be constructed or
operated in the absence of the proposed Project. The three connected
actions associated with the proposed Project are described below. While
these projects would be reviewed and acted on by other agencies as
needed, the draft Supplemental EIS also evaluates the impacts of
these connected actions.

*ES.4.3.1 The Bakken Marketlink Project*

Keystone Marketlink, LLC, a wholly owned subsidiary of TransCanada
Pipelines Limited, would construct and operate the Bakken Marketlink
Project. This project would include a 5-mile pipeline, pumps, meters,
and storage tanks to supply Bakken crude oil to the proposed pipeline
from the proposed Bakken Marketlink pipeline system in North Dakota
and Montana. Three crude oil storage tanks would be built near Baker,
Montana, as part of this project. This proposed project can deliver
up to 100,000 bpd of crude oil, and has commitments for approximately
65,000 bpd.

*ES.4.3.2 Big Bend to Witten 230-kV Electrical Transmission Line*

The Western Area Power Administration (Western) has determined that
providing reliable electricity for operation of the proposed Project
requires the construction of a new 230-kilovolt (kV) transmission
line, originating at the Fort Thompson/Big Bend Dam area in South
Dakota and extending south to the existing Witten Substation. To
meet these demands, Western would repurpose existing transmission
infrastructure and construct new infrastructure between the Dam and
a proposed Big Bend Substation. The Basin Electric Power Cooperative
would construct a new 76-mile, 230-kV transmission line from the Big
Bend Substation to the existing Witten Substation, and would operate
both the transmission line and the Big Bend Substation.

*ES.4.3.3 Electrical Distribution Lines and Substations*

Electrical power for the proposed Project would be obtained from local
power providers. These power providers would construct the necessary
substations and transformers and would either use existing service
lines or construct new service lines to deliver electrical power to
the specified point of use (e.g., pump stations and mainline valves),
which would be located at intervals along the proposed Project route.

ES.5 **ENVIRONMENTAL ANALYSIS**

Construction of the proposed Project would disturb approximately 15,493
acres of land. After construction, approximately 5,584 acres would
be retained for operation of the proposed Project; this includes the
pipeline ROW and aboveground facilities. Construction and operation
of the proposed Project would result in numerous impacts to the
environment. The Department evaluated the impacts of the proposed
Project and alternatives associated with the following types of
resources and consequences:

• Fisheries

• Recreation

• Cultural resources

• Climate change

• Water resources

• Pipeline releases

• Terrestrial vegetation

• Threatened and endangered species

• Visual resources

• Air quality

• Socioeconomics

The proposed Project Construction, Mitigation, and Reclamation Plan
(CMRP) (see Appendix G) includes procedures that Keystone would follow
to reduce the likelihood and severity of, or avoid impacts from the
proposed Project.

The discussion below summarizes the findings of the analysis related
to selected resources and consequences. These resources would either
be substantially impacted by the proposed Project, or have been the
focus of particular public attention and comment.

**ES.5.1 Soils**

Construction of the proposed Project and its connected actions could
affect soil resources. Potential impacts could include, to varying
degrees:

• Soil erosion;

• Loss of topsoil;

• Soil compaction;

• Changes in soil composition (increased proportion of large rocks
in the topsoil);

• Soil mixing; and

• Soil contamination. Nearly half of the proposed Project route
would cross soils characterized as highly erodible to either wind or
water, and comments on the 2011 Final EIS expressed concern about the
proposed Project's effects on erodible soils. Many of the stages of
construction---notably clearing, trenching, and spoil storage---could
potentially increase soil erosion. Such erosion, in turn, could result
in loss of valuable topsoil from its original location. The proposed
Project avoids the NDEQ-identified Sand Hills region, as well as areas
in Keya Paha County, Nebraska, defined by NDEQ as having Sand Hills-
like soils.

These potential impacts would be mitigated through a variety of
measures. Keystone's proposed construction methods (Appendix G,
CMRP) incorporate measures to reduce soil erosion, including the
use of sediment barriers, trench plugs, temporary slope breakers,
drainage channels or ditches, mulching, and inspection of these
control methods. Specific additional methods and measures, such as
the following would apply in areas of fragile soils (i.e., where the
soil exhibits conditions typical of the NDEQ-identified Sand Hills
Region and is very susceptible to wind erosion):

• Use of photodegradable matting, sediment logs, or straw wattles
rather than terraces (slope breakers) in steep slope or erosion-prone
areas;

• Use of native seed mixes (developed with local Natural Resource
Conservation Service offices and used in coordination with landowners);

• Use of trench-line or blade-width stripping procedures where
practicable to reduce the width of disturbance; and

• Minor route realignments. Approximately 4,715 acres of prime
farmland soil would be directly impacted by construction of the
proposed pipeline. To avoid permanent impacts to these soils, topsoil
in non-forested agricultural areas would be removed and stockpiled
at the edge of the ROW during excavation activities and returned

following completion of construction and subsurface soil
preparation. Salvage depths would vary from 4 inches in shallow soils
to 12 inches in highly productive soils. Operation of the proposed
Project would have minor, localized impacts on soils.

**ES.5.2 Water Resources**

In response to public scoping comments for the proposed Project, the
draft Supplemental EIS includes a detailed assessment of impacts on
groundwater and surface water, including shallow groundwater associated
with the Ogallala Aquifer and the NDEQ-identified Sand Hills Region.

*ES.5.2.1 Surface Water*

The proposed Project would impact waterbodies across the states of
Montana, South Dakota, and Nebraska. The proposed Project route would
avoid surface water whenever possible; however, the proposed Project
route would still cross approximately 1,073 waterbodies, including
56 perennial rivers and streams, as well as approximately 25 miles
of mapped floodplains.

*Construction Phase*

Construction of the proposed Project could result in temporary and
permanent impacts such as:

• Stream sedimentation;

• Changes in stream channel morphology (shape) and stability;

• Temporarily reduced flow in streams; and

• Potential impacts associated with spills. Open-cut methods would
be used at most waterbody crossings. However, impacts to surface
waterbodies would be mitigated through various means. Horizontal
directional drilling (HDD) would be used at 14 major and sensitive
waterbody crossings (see Figure ES-6). Waterbody banks would be
restored to preconstruction contours or to a stable slope. Seeding,
erosion control fabric, and other erosion control measures would be
installed, as specified in the CMRP (Appendix G), and permit documents.

*Operations Phase*

Surface water impacts associated with potential releases of crude
oil and other hazardous liquid spills are addressed later in this
Executive Summary. Other potential impacts during the operations
phase would include:

• Channel migration or streambed degradation that exposes the
pipeline;

• Channel incision that increases bank heights to the point where
slopes are destabilized, ultimately widening the stream; and

• Sedimentation within a channel that triggers lateral bank
erosion, such as the expansion of a channel meander (curve) opposite
a point bar.

Mitigation measures to address these impacts would include those
specified in the CMRP (Appendix G). Crossings would be at least 5
feet below the bottom of all waterbodies, and would have a horizontal
buffer of at least 15 feet from either waterbody edge.

**Figure ES-6: Cross Section of Horizontal Directional Drilling
Method**

Where an HDD method is used, the crossing depth would be up to 50
feet below the stream bed. Potential bank protection measures could
include installing rock, wood, or other materials keyed into the bank
to provide protection from further erosion, or regrading the banks
to reduce the bank slope.

*ES.5.2.2 Groundwater*

The primary source of groundwater impacts from the proposed Project
would be potential releases of petroleum during pipeline operation
and, to a lesser extent, from fuel spills from equipment. The risks
and impacts of these effects are discussed later in this Executive
Summary. Any petroleum releases from construction or operation could
potentially impact groundwater where the overlying soils are permeable
and the depth to groundwater is shallow. Table ES-1 summarizes the
anticipated effects of potential releases from the proposed Project
on the aquifers and aquifer groups along the proposed Project route.

Figure ES-7 provides a schematic view of these groundwater resources.

*Hydrostatic Testing*

Water hydrostatic testing is performed to expose defective materials
or welds that have missed prior detection, expose possible leaks,
and serve as a final validation of the integrity of the constructed
system. Water is pumped into the sealed pipe section, typically to a
pressure greater that the specified pipe strength, and the pressurized
segment is monitored for failure.

Following the test, the water is removed from the pipe and returned to
the natural environment or disposed of in a regulated fashion. Water
used for hydrostatic testing would be obtained from nearby surface
water resources, groundwater, or municipal sources. Approximately 50
potential surface water sources have been identified along the proposed
Project route. Discharged water would be tested for water quality prior
to release to ensure that it meets applicable water quality standards.

**Table ES-1: Effects of Potential Releases on Aquifers**

**Aquifer Effects**

Alluvial Aquifers and Northern High Plains Aquifer (NHPAQ), including
the Ogallala Aquifer

Aquifer conditions in the NHPAQ in the proposed Project area indicate
that shallow groundwater generally discharges to local surface
waterbodies, and typically does not flow downward in significant
amounts or flow horizontally over long distances. Analysis of
historic spills and groundwater modeling indicate that contaminant
plumes from a large-scale release that reaches groundwater in the
NHPAQ and alluvial aquifers could be expected to affect groundwater
quality up to approximately 1,000 feet downgradient of the release
source. This localized effect indicates that petroleum releases from
the proposed Project would not extensively affect water quality in
this aquifer group.

Great Plains Aquifer (GPA)

Across most of the proposed pipeline area where the GPA is present,
it is very unlikely that any releases from the proposed pipeline
would affect groundwater quality in the aquifer, because the aquifer
is typically deeply buried beneath younger, water-bearing sediments
and/or aquitard units. The exception is in southern Nebraska, where
the aquifer is closer to the surface. Water quality in the GPA could
be affected by releases in this area, but groundwater flow patterns
in the vicinity of the proposed Project route make such effects
unlikely. Overall, it is very unlikely that the proposed pipeline area
would affect water quality in the GPA due to weak downward gradients
(downward groundwater flows) in the aquifers overlying the GPA.

Western Interior Plains Aquifer

The depth to this aquifer is several hundred feet in the proposed
Project area; therefore, there is an extremely low probability that
a petroleum release from the proposed Project would affect water
quality in this aquifer.

Northern Great Plains Aquifer System (NGPAS)

As with the GPA, petroleum releases from the proposed Project would
only affect water quality in portions of the NGPAS near the ground
surface. In the case of a large-scale release, these impacts would
typically be limited to within several hundred feet of the release
source, and would not affect groundwater within areas that provide
groundwater recharge to large portions of the NGPAS.

Shallow Groundwater and Water Wells here are 2,537 wells within 1 mile
of the proposed Project, including 39 public water supply ells and 20
private wells within 100 feet of the pipeline ROW. The vast majority
of these wells e in Nebraska. Those wells that were in the vicinity
may be affected by a petroleum release from the proposed Project.

**Figure ES-7: Schematic Hydrogeologic Cross-Section along Proposed
Pipeline Route**

*ES.5.2.3 Floodplains*

The proposed pipeline would cross mapped and unmapped floodplains in
Montana, South Dakota, and Nebraska. In floodplain areas adjacent
to waterbody crossings, contours would be restored to as close to
previously existing contours as practical and the disturbed area would
be revegetated during construction of the ROW in accordance with the
CMRP (Appendix G). After construction, the proposed pipeline would
not obstruct flows over designated floodplains, and any changes to
topography would be minimal and thus would not affect local flood
dynamics or flood elevations.

**ES.5.3 Threatened and Endangered Species**

Consultation with the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS) identified
13 federally protected or candidate species that could be impacted by
the proposed Project: eleven federally-listed threatened or endangered
species, as defined under the Endangered Species Act (ESA), and two
candidate species for listing as threatened or endangered. In addition,
this draft Supplemental EIS also evaluated the potential Project
impacts on one species under consideration for federal protection
under ESA. In consultation with the USFWS, the Department prepared
a Biological Assessment (BA) to evaluate the proposed Project's
potential impacts to federally protected and candidate species and
their federally designated critical habitat (Appendix H). In addition,
13 state-listed species that are not also federally listed species
and one species under consideration for federal protection under the
ESA could be impacted by the proposed Project.

Types of potential impacts to threatened and endangered species
include:

• Habitat loss, alteration, and fragmentation;

• Direct mortality during construction and operation, including
collision with power lines;

• Indirect mortality due to stress or avoidance of feeding, and/or
reduced breeding success due to exposure to noise and/or increased
human activity; and

• Reduced survival or reproduction due to decreased abundance of
food or reduced cover.

The subsections below provide additional detail on species that
could potentially be affected by the proposed Project, or species
that are frequent topics of concern for projects similar to or in
the same geographic region as the Project. Monitoring and mitigation
measures that address these impacts are discussed thoroughly in the
draft Supplemental EIS.

*ES.5.3.1 American Burying Beetle*

Of the 13 federally protected or candidate species, the American
burying beetle (*Nicrophorus americanus*) was the only species
determined to be potentially adversely affected by the proposed
Project.

**Figure ES-8: American Burying Beetle**

Approximately 50 miles of the proposed Project Route in Nebraska
would affect American burying beetle habitat; approximately
43 miles in South Dakota would affect suitable habitat for the
species. Consultation between the Department and USFWS resulted in
development of conservation measures and compensatory mitigation,
such as trapping and relocating beetles, special lighting restrictions
(the beetles are attracted to light), and establishment of a habitat
conservation trust.

Even with these measures, the proposed Project could affect, and would
be likely to adversely affect the American burying beetle, resulting
in incidental takes (unintended death of individual beetles) during
construction or operations. Keystone continues to work with USFWS to
refine conservation measures for minimizing incidental take and to
quantify estimated incidental take and development of compensatory
mitigation through the formal Section 7 ESA consultation process for
the American burying beetle.

*ES.5.3.2 Whooping Crane*

The whooping crane (*Grus Americana*) is federally protected and is
also protected under the Migratory Bird Treaty Act. Whooping cranes
could be impacted by collisions with power lines associated with
the proposed Project. The majority of the proposed Project route
crosses the central flyway whooping crane migration corridor in
South Dakota and Nebraska, and the Rainwater Basin in south central
Nebraska provides whooping crane migration habitat. With avoidance,
minimization, and conservation measures, such as following the
Whooping Crane Survey Protocol previously developed by the USFWS and
Nebraska Game and Parks Commission, the proposed Project is unlikely to
adversely affect whooping cranes, based on the low likelihood of the
species occurring near the proposed Project route during construction
and operations activities and implementation of USFWS recommended
mitigation measures.

*ES.5.3.3 Greater Sage-Grouse*

The greater sage-grouse (*Centrocerus urophasianus*) is a federal
candidate species under the ESA, a Bureau of Land Management sensitive
species, and a species of conservation concern in Montana and South
Dakota. Approximately 190 miles of the proposed Project route would
cross areas with greater sage-grouse habitat in Montana, of which 94
miles are classified as moderate to high-quality habitat for greater
sage-grouse.

**Figure ES-9: Greater Sage-Grouse**

The most substantial potential effects of the proposed Project
on the greater sage grouse would be disturbance of habitat,
including sagebrush, which can take up to 20 years to regenerate
to pre-construction cover levels, and disturbance of mating and
breeding behavior.

The BA (Appendix H) and greater sage-grouse mitigation plans for
Montana and South Dakota describe conservation measures that Keystone
would implement to address potential impacts. After implementation of
these measures, the proposed Project would not likely affect greater
sage-grouse mating behavior, and would likely result in a low impact
on nesting greater sage-grouse. Construction would likely result in
an incremental loss of sagebrush habitat.

*ES.5.3.4 Western Prairie Fringed Orchid*

The western prairie fringed orchid (*Platanthera leucophaea*)
is federally listed as threatened, state- listed as threatened
in Nebraska, and is a species of conservation concern in South
Dakota. The proposed Project would pass near known populations of
western prairie fringed orchid in Nebraska, and through land where the
orchid may potentially occur in South Dakota. Clearing and grading of
land associated with construction of the proposed Project (including
pipeline and ancillary facilities) may potentially disturb western
prairie fringed orchids, and may introduce or expand invasive species
that already contribute to the orchid's decline.

**Figure ES-10: Western Prairie Fringed Orchid**

Keystone would implement conservation measures included in the BA
(Appendix H) and would avoid known western prairie fringed orchid
populations; therefore, the proposed Project would not be likely to
adversely affect the western prairie fringed orchid.

*ES.5.3.5 Small White Lady's Slipper*

The small white lady's slipper *(Cypripedium candidum)*, a type
of perennial orchid, is a threatened species under Nebraska state
law. This species may potentially occur within suitable habitat along
the proposed Project route in Nebraska. If this plant were to be
observed within the proposed Project route in Nebraska, appropriate
mitigation measures would be developed and implemented in consultation
with state agencies.

**ES.5.4 Socioeconomics and Environmental Justice**

The draft Supplemental EIS updates the economic data contained in
the Final EIS and re-evaluates the economic impacts of the proposed
Project. In particular, and in response to public comments, the draft
Supplemental EIS addresses local economic impacts and Environmental
Justice.

*ES.5.4.1 Tribal Consultation*

Government-to-government consultation is underway for the current
Supplemental EIS process for the proposed Project, and tribal meetings
were held in October 2012 in Montana, South Dakota, and Nebraska. As
the lead federal agency for the proposed Project, the Department
is continuing throughout the Supplemental EIS process to engage in
consultation on the Supplemental EIS, the proposed Project generally,
and on cultural resources consistent with Section 106 of the National
Historic Preservation Act of 1986 with identified consulting parties,
including federal agencies, state agencies, State Historic Preservation
Offices, the Advisory Council on Historic Preservation, and interested
federally recognized Native American tribes in the vicinity of the
proposed Project.

*ES.5.4.2 Socioeconomics*

*Construction*

Construction of the proposed Project would generate temporary,
positive socioeconomic impacts as a result of local employment, taxes,
spending by construction workers, and spending on construction goods
and services. Including direct, indirect, and induced effects, the
proposed Project would potentially support approximately 42,100 average

annual jobs across the United States over a 1- to 2- year construction
period (of which, approximately 3,900 would be directly employed in
construction activities). This employment would potentially translate
to approximately $2.05 billion in earnings. Direct expenditures such
as construction and materials costs (including construction camps)
would total approximately $3.3 billion. Short-term revenues from
sources such as sales and use taxes would total approximately $65
million in states that levy such a tax. Yields from fuel and other
taxes could not be calculated, but would provide some additional
economic benefit to host counties and states.

The proposed Project area does not have sufficient temporary housing
for the anticipated construction workforce. Keystone proposes to meet
the housing need through a combination of local housing and eight
construction camps. Property taxes on these camps would potentially
generate the equivalent of one full year of property tax revenue for
seven host counties, totaling approximately $2 million.

Other construction-phase socioeconomic impacts would include minor
increases in demand for utilities and public services (such as
police, fire, and emergency medical services), and temporary traffic
delays at public road crossings. The construction camps would provide
utilities and other services for workers, reducing demands on existing
communities.

*Operations Phase*

Generally, the largest economic impacts of pipelines occur during
construction rather than operations. Once in place, the labor
requirements for pipeline operations are relatively minor. Operation of
the proposed Project would generate 35 permanent and 15 temporary jobs,
primarily for routine inspections, maintenance, and repairs. Based
on this estimate, routine operation of the proposed Pipeline would
have negligible socioeconomic impacts.

*ES.5.4.3 Environmental Justice*

As defined by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, "Environmental
Justice" refers to the "fair treatment and meaningful involvement
of all people regardless of race, color, national origin, or income
with respect to the development, implementation, and enforcement
of environmental laws, regulations, and policies." Executive Order
12898 further directs federal agencies to identify and address,
as appropriate, disproportionately high and adverse health or
environmental effects of their programs, policies, and activities
on minority populations and low-income populations, specifically
as part of a NEPA process. Within the socioeconomic analysis area,
16 block groups contain minority populations that were meaningfully
greater than the surrounding state or county (reference areas),
and five census tracts had larger low-income populations than their
respective reference areas. Four of these areas contained both types of
"meaningfully greater" populations.

Impacts to minority and low-income populations during construction
may include exposure to construction dust and noise, disruption to
traffic patterns, and increased competition for medical or health
services in underserved populations. Such impacts would generally be
small and short-term.

Typical operation of the proposed Project is unlikely to
disproportionately adversely impact the Environmental Justice
populations discussed in this section. Because the risk of a potential
release is roughly equal at all points along the pipeline, the risks
associated with such releases would not be disproportionately borne
by minority or low-income populations.

**ES.5.5 Greenhouse Gas Emissions and Climate Change**

The draft Supplemental EIS evaluates the GHG emissions associated
with the proposed Project from several distinct perspectives. The
construction and operation of the proposed Project and its connected
actions (the pipeline, pump stations, electrical transmission lines,
etc.) would generate GHG emissions. In addition, concerns have been
raised that extracting the crude oil that would be transported by
the proposed Project produces more GHG emissions compared to other
types of crude oil. Finally, climate change considerations---which
are influenced by GHG emissions---could affect the construction and
operation of the proposed Project. GHG and climate change issues
were the subject of many comments received during the public scoping
process for the proposed Project.

*ES.5.5.1 Greenhouse Gas Emissions*

Construction and operation of the proposed Project would generate
GHG emissions from several sources or activities, as described below.

*Construction-Phase Sources*

• Clearing of land in the proposed ROW via open burning;

• Electricity usage and emergency generators at construction
camps; and

• Construction vehicles, worker transports, and other mobile sources.

*Operations-Phase Sources*

• Fugitive methane emissions at connections;

• Maintenance vehicles (two or more times per year);

• Aircraft used for aerial inspection (biweekly); and

• Electrical generation for pump station power. During the
construction period, GHG emissions from these sources and activities
would be approximately 240,423 metric tons of carbon dioxide
equivalents (CO2e). Emissions during operation of the proposed Project
would be approximately 3.19 million metric tons of CO2e per year,
almost entirely due to electrical generation needed to power the
proposed Project's pump stations.

The annual CO2e emissions from the proposed Project is equivalent to
CO2e emissions from approximately 626,000 passenger vehicles operating
for one year or 398,000 homes using electricity for one year.

*ES.5.5.2 Life Cycle Analysis*

Combustion of fossil fuels, including petroleum- based products
such as crude oil, is a major source of global GHG emissions, which
contribute to human- induced climate change. WCSB crudes are more
GHG-intensive than the other heavy crudes they would replace or
displace in U.S. refineries, and emit an estimated 17 percent more
GHGs on a life-cycle basis than the average barrel of crude oil
refined in the United States in 2005. If the proposed Project were
to induce growth in the rate of extraction in the oil sands, then it
could cause GHG emissions greater than just its direct emissions.

Based on information and analysis about the North American crude
transport infrastructure (particularly the proven ability of rail
to transport substantial quantities of crude oil profitably under
current market conditions, and to add capacity relatively rapidly)
and the global crude oil market, the draft Supplemental EIS concludes
that approval or denial of the proposed

Project is unlikely to have a substantial impact on the rate of
development in the oil sands, or on the amount of heavy crude oil
refined in the Gulf Coast area.

As discussed in the market analysis, if the proposed Project were
denied but other proposed new and expanded pipelines go forward,
production could decrease by approximately 0.4 to 0.6 percent of total
WCSB production by 2030. If all pipeline capacity were restricted,
oil sands production could decrease by approximately 2 to 4 percent
by 2030.

The incremental indirect life-cycle emissions associated with those
decreases in oil sands production are estimated to be in the range of
0.07 to 0.83 million metric tons CO2 equivalent (MMTCO2e) annually
if the proposed Project were not built, and in the range of 0.35 to
5.3 MMTCO2e annually if all pipeline projects were denied.

As WCSB and Bakken crudes replace crudes from other
sources---independent of whether the proposed Project exists---the
life-cycle GHG emissions associated with transportation fuels produced
in U.S. refineries would likely increase. The GHG intensity of
reference crudes may also increase in the future as more of the world
crude supply requires extraction by increasingly energy-intensive
techniques, such as those used to extract oil-sands crude, although
regulatory pressures and technological advances could counter this
trend.

*ES.5.5.3 Climate Change Effects on the Project*

Changes in climate have been observed both globally and within
the proposed Project study area over the past century. These
changes include direct effects, such as increases and decreases
in temperature and precipitation, and indirect effects, such as
increases in freeze-thaw cycles, increased occurrences of flooding
and drought, and wind erosion of soil, and resultant changes to the
natural environment, such as vegetation changes.

As part of the preparation of this draft Supplemental EIS, an analysis
was performed to evaluate the potential impacts of climate change
on the proposed Project construction and operations. Using future
climate scenarios developed by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change and peer-reviewed downscaled models, the draft Supplemental
EIS evaluates the range of impacts that climate change could have on
the proposed Project.

Assuming construction of the proposed Project begins as planned in
2015, climate conditions during the 1- to 2-year construction period
would not differ substantially from current conditions. During the
operations period, climate change projections suggest the following
changes:

• Warmer winter temperatures;

• A shorter cool season;

• A longer duration of frost-free periods;

• More freeze-thaw cycles per year (which could lead to an increased
number of episodes of soil contraction and expansion);

• Warmer summer temperatures;

• Increased number of hot days and consecutive hot days; and

• Longer summers (which could lead to impacts associated with heat
stress and wildfire risks).

The pipeline would be buried deep enough to avoid surface impacts of
climate changes (freeze-thaw cycles, fires, and temperature extremes).

**ES.5.6 Potential Releases**

The terms "release," "leak," and "spill" are used throughout this
section. These are distinct terms. A release is a loss of integrity
of a pipeline (including the mainline and other components); a leak
is a release over time; and a spill is the liquid volume of a leak
that escapes any containment system and enters the environment. This
section describes the release and spill analyses included in the
draft Supplemental EIS, including potential impacts on waterbodies
and mitigation measures, as identified in public scoping comments.

*ES.5.6.1 Spill Scenarios*

The Potential Releases section of the draft Supplemental EIS addresses
the risks and potential impacts of crude oil releases and spills
during construction and operation of the proposed Project. This risk
assessment addresses both the potential frequency of operational
pipeline releases and the potential crude oil spill volumes associated
with the releases, using three hypothetical spill volumes to represent
the range of reported spills in the Pipeline and Hazardous Materials
Safety Administration (PHMSA) database. These spill volumes and the
probabilities of such volumes are shown in Table ES-2. Screening-level
(i.e., general) models were used to estimate the distance oil could
move over land or migrate in groundwater.

Table ES-3 summarizes hazardous liquid pipeline incidents reported
to PHMSA from January 2002 through July 2012 and shows the breakdown
of incidents by pipeline component. Figure ES-11 summarizes the spill
scenarios reported to PHMSA, by pipeline elements.

**Table ES-2: Spill Scenarios Evaluated in Draft Supplemental EIS**

**Spill Volume Scenario Frequencya**

Small: Less than 50 barrels (bbl) (2,100 gallons) 79% Medium:
50--1,000 bbl (2,100--42,000 gallons) 17% Large: 1,000--20,000 bbl
(42,000--840,000 gallons) 4% a Indicates the share of all releases
reported in the PHMSA database that fit each spill volume scenario.

**Table ES-3: Summary of PHMSA Database Incidents (January 2002 to
July 2012)**

**Incident Category Incidents Incident Sub-Category Incidents**

Crude oil pipeline 1,692 Crude oil mainline pipe incidents 321 Crude
oil pipeline, equipment incidents (not mainline pipe) 1,027 Crude
oil pipeline system, unspecified elements 344

Crude oil mainline pipe 321

16-inch or greater diameter 71 8-inch or 15-inch diameter 154 Less
than 8-inch diameter 52 Diameter not provided 44

Crude oil pipeline, equipment (not mainline pipe)

1,027 Tanks 93 Valves 25 Other discrete elements (pumps, fittings,
etc.) 909

0% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90% 100%

Pipeline, All Elements

Mainline Pipe

Mainline Pipe, Diameter 16"+

Pipeline System, Tanks

Pipeline System, Mainline Valves

Pipeline System, Other Discrete Elements

0 -- 50 bbl 50 -- 1,000 bbl 1,000 -- 20,000 bbl

**Spill Scenarios**

Source: PHMSA Hazardous Liquid Pipeline Incident Data 2002--2012,
and PHMSA Liquid Annual Pipeline Data. 2004--2011

**Figure ES-11: Spill Volume Distribution by Pipeline Component**

*ES.5.6.2 Oil Movement*

*Small and Medium Spills*

The potential impacts from small leaks of oil would typically be
confined to soil immediately surrounding the leak, and would have
little effect on nearby natural resources. These types of spills
would generally be detected by maintenance or operations personnel and
addressed through repair of the leak and removal and remediation of
impacted soil. A slow subsurface leak, characterized as a slow drip
(e.g., gallons per year as opposed to gallons per minute), would
infiltrate into soil and could potentially reach a groundwater
resource. If the spill rate is faster than the soil can absorb,
the oil may surface and potentially flow away from the release site,
affecting nearby vegetation or other resources.

With medium spills, a release can occur as a subsurface or surface
event depending upon the cause. Similar to a small spill, a slow
subsurface release could potentially reach a groundwater resource,
and if the rate of the spill is faster than the soil can absorb,
the oil may surface. Once the migrating oil leaves the release site,
impacts to soil, vegetation, and surface water along the flow path
might occur. Depending on how quickly it is remediated, some of this
volume of material might tend to pool in low areas and potentially
infiltrate back into the soil and to groundwater depending on the
depth to groundwater. Potential behavior in shallow groundwater is
the same as small spills that reach groundwater; the spill could
migrate away from the release site. Because of the increased volume
of oil released from the pipeline when compared to a small release,
it is also possible that oil could pool on groundwater.

*Large Spills*

With a large spill, the majority of the spill volume would migrate
away from the release site. The potential impacts from a large spill
would be similar to the impacts from the medium-sized spill, but on a
much larger scale. Once the spill reaches the surface, the oil would
flow following topographic gradient or lows (e.g., gullies, roadside
drainage ditches, culverts, and storm sewers) and eventually to surface
water features. If the release enters flowing water or other surface
water feature, the extent of the release could become very large,
potentially affecting soil and vegetation along miles of river and
shoreline. Sinking oil can be deposited in river or stream bottoms
and become a continual source of oil as changing water flows release
the deposited oil.

*ES.5.6.3 Mitigation*

Keystone has agreed to incorporate 57 Special Conditions developed
by PHMSA into the proposed Project and in its manual for operations,
maintenance, and emergencies. The majority of the Special Conditions
relate to reduction in the likelihood of a release occurring. Some
provide mitigation that reduces the consequences and impact of a spill,
should such an event occur. Examples of the types of Special Conditions
that PHMSA developed to reduce the risk of a release include, among
others, measures that would better prevent corrosion, stress cracking,
equipment malfunctions, third-party damage, and operator error.

**ES.5.7 Cumulative Effects**

The cumulative effects analysis evaluates the way that the proposed
Project's impacts interact with the impact of other past, present,
and reasonably foreseeable future actions or projects. The goal of
the cumulative impacts analysis is to identify situations where sets
of comparatively small individual impacts, taken together, constitute
a larger collective impact.

For the proposed Project, the draft Supplemental EIS identifies
actions or projects with the potential for cumulative impacts. The
cumulative effects analysis provides detailed evaluation of the
effects of these projects when combined with the proposed Project,
including impacts on resources within the United States, lifecycle
GHG emissions of WCSB activities, and impacts on resources in Canada.

**ES.5.8 Environmental Impacts in Canada**

In addition to the environmental analysis of the proposed Project in
the United States, the Department monitored and obtained information
from the environmental analysis of the Canadian portion of the
Project. The Canadian government conducted an environmental review
of the portion of the proposed Project in Canada. The Department did
not conduct an assessment of the potential impacts of the Canadian
portion of the proposed Project. However, the Department has included
information from the Canadian government's assessment in this draft
Supplemental EIS.

The Canadian environmental analysis process began in July 2008 and
involved an environmental assessment process pursuant to the Canadian
Environmental Assessment Act. On March 11, 2010, the Canadian National
Energy Board (NEB) issued its Reasons for Decision granting Keystone's
application. The NEB's Reasons for Decision included an Environmental
Screening Report that was prepared to meet the requirements of
Canadian Environmental Assessment Act for the Canadian portion of
the proposed Project.

The Environmental Screening Report concluded that, with incorporation
of Keystone's proposed measures to avoid or minimize impacts and
with Keystone's acceptance of the NEB's regulatory requirements and
recommended conditions, implementation of the proposed Project in
Canada would not likely result in significant adverse environmental
effects. For the Canadian portion of the pipeline, construction began
on the Hardisty B Terminal in September 2010, and HDD crossings of the
Red Deer and South Saskatchewan rivers were completed in early 2012.

Analysis and mitigation of environmental impacts in Canada are
ongoing by Canadian officials. For example, on September 1, 2012, the
Government of Alberta's development plan for the Lower Athabascan oil
sands region became effective. The plan would require cancellation of
about ten oil sands leases, set aside nearly 20,000 square kilometers
(7,700 square miles) for conservation, and set new environmental
standards for the region in an effort to protect sensitive habitat,
wildlife, and forest land.

ES.6 **ALTERNATIVES**

The draft Supplemental EIS considers three broad categories
of alternatives to the proposed Project, consistent with NEPA
requirements:

• No Action Alternative---which addresses potential market responses
that could result if the Presidential Permit is denied or the proposed
Project is not otherwise implemented;

• Major Route Alternatives---which includes other potential pipeline
routes for transporting WCSB and Bakken crude oil to Steele City,
Nebraska; and

• Other Alternatives---which include minor route variations,
alternative pipeline designs, and alternative sites for aboveground
facilities.

**ES.6.1 Scenario Screening**

Several alternatives exist for the transport of WCSB and Bakken crude
oil to Gulf Coast refineries, including many that were not carried
forward for detailed analysis. The draft Supplemental EIS provides
a more detailed description of the categories of alternatives,
the alternative screening process, and the detailed alternatives
identified for evaluation in the draft Supplemental EIS.

Potential No Action Alternative scenarios were screened based on
technical and economic feasibility, such as implementation timeframe
and crude oil transport capacity, as well as the potential to
provide a cost advantage (compared to other No Action Alternative
scenarios). As explained in detail in the draft Supplemental EIS,
No Action Alternative scenarios excluded from further analysis are:

• Rail or Pipeline to Vancouver, British Columbia, and Tanker to
Gulf Coast;

• Rail Directly to Gulf Coast;

• Rail to Wood River, Illinois; Barge to Gulf Coast via Mississippi
River;

• Bitumen by Rail; and

• Canadian Pipeline Scenario (Existing Pipelines). The primary
purpose of major route alternatives is to identify a route that
avoids the NDEQ-identified Sand Hills Region without an unacceptable
increase in other environmental impacts. Although the Keystone XL
2011 Steele City Segment Alternative traverses the NDEQ-identified
Sand Hills Region, the draft Supplemental EIS evaluates the impacts
of constructing that route as a comparison against which other route
alternatives, including the proposed Project, can be made. The initial
(Phase I) screening of other major route alternatives considered the
following criteria:

• Project Purpose---to be considered reasonable, an alternative
must provide reliable transport of up to 730,000 bpd of WCSB crude
oil and up to 100,000 bpd of Bakken crude oil to Cushing, Oklahoma
(the intermediate destination of crude oil in the proposed Project) or
Gulf Coast refineries (the ultimate destination of that crude oil); and

• Pipeline Length---pipeline length was considered a relative measure
of reliability, environmental impact, and construction/operational
costs.

The Phase II screening used a desktop data review of key environmental
and other features (e.g., wetlands and waterbodies crossed, total
acreage affected). Major route alternatives excluded from further
analysis are:

• Western Alternative (to Cushing);

• Express-Platte Alternative;

• Steele City Segment-A1A Alternative;

• Keystone Corridor Option 1; and

• Keystone Corridor Option 2.

**ES.6.2 Market Analysis**

This section in the Supplemental EIS examines the changes in petroleum
markets since the publication of the Final EIS on August 26, 2011. It
assesses whether these changes alter the conclusion of the 2011 Final
EIS market analysis, namely, that the proposed Project is unlikely
to significantly affect the rate of extraction in the oil sands or in
U.S. refining activities. Specifically, the section presents changes
observed in the petroleum market since August 2011 and how such changes
may impact the assessment made in the Final EIS. The analysis is based,
in part, on the following considerations.

Several changes in the outlook for the crude oil market since August
2011 have occurred and are accounted for in the Supplemental EIS
analysis. First, the outlook for U.S. demand for transportation fuel
is now lower than it was in 2010 and 2011. Second, domestic production
of crude oil has increased and is expected to continue increasing
over the next 10 to 15 years. Third, the infrastructure for crude
oil transportation in North America, including pipeline, rail, and
other non-pipeline modes, is undergoing significant adaptations and
increases in capacity.

While the increase in U.S. production of crude oil and the reduced
U.S. demand for transportation fuels will likely reduce the demand for
total U.S. crude oil imports, it is unlikely to reduce demand for heavy
sour crude at Gulf Coast refineries. Additionally, as was projected in
the 2011 Final EIS, the midstream industry is showing it is capable
of developing alternative capacity to move WCSB (and Bakken and
Midcontinent) crudes to markets in the event the proposed Project is
not built. Specifically, it is moving to develop alternative pipeline
capacity that would support Western Canadian, Bakken, and Midcontinent
crude oil movements to the Gulf Coast and is increasingly using rail
to transport large volumes of crude oil to East, West, and Gulf Coast
markets as a viable alternative to pipelines. In addition, projected
crude oil prices are sufficient to support production of essentially
all Western Canadian crude oil projects (and U.S. tight oil projects,
such as those in the Bakken shale), even with potentially somewhat
more expensive transport options to market in the form of alternative
pipelines and rail. Rail and supporting non-pipeline modes should be
capable, as was projected in 2011, of providing the capacity needed
to transport all

incremental Western Canadian and Bakken crude oil production to
markets if there were no additional pipeline projects approved.

Approval or denial of any one crude oil transport project, including
the proposed Project, remains unlikely to significantly impact the
rate of extraction in the oil sands, or the continued demand for
heavy crude oil at refineries in the U.S. Limitations on pipeline
transport would force more crude oil to be transported via other
modes of transportation, such as rail, which would probably (but not
certainly) be more expensive. Longer term limitations also depend
upon whether pipeline projects that are located exclusively in Canada
proceed (such as the proposed Northern Gateway, the Trans Mountain
expansion, and the TransCanada proposal to ship crude oil east to
Ontario on a converted natural gas pipeline).

If all such pipeline capacity were restricted in the
medium-to-long-term, the incremental increase in cost of the
non-pipeline transport options could result in a decrease in production
from the oil sands, perhaps 90,000 to 210,000 bpd (approximately 2
to 4 percent) by 2030. If the proposed Project were denied but other
proposed new and expanded pipelines go forward, the incremental
decrease in production could be approximately 20,000 to 30,000 bpd
(from 0.4 to 0.6 percent of total WCSB production) by 2030.

Fundamental changes to the world crude oil market, and/or more far
reaching actions than are evaluated in this Supplemental EIS would be
required to significantly impact the rate of production in the oil
sands. In light of the additional analysis performed, as explained
in the Supplemental EIS, these changes are not anticipated to alter
the outlook for the crude oil market in a manner that would lead to
a change in the key conclusions reached in the 2011 Final EIS.

**ES.6.3 No Action Alternative**

The No Action Alternative includes an evaluation of multiple
scenarios that describe potential outcomes if the Department was
to deny the Presidential Permit for the proposed Project, or if
it was otherwise not constructed. Based on available information
and independent analysis discussed at greater length in the draft
Supplemental EIS, under a No Action "Status Quo" Alternative,
production and transportation of WCSB and Bakken crude oil would remain
unchanged. This scenario serves as a benchmark against which other
alternatives are evaluated, although market forces would preclude
this scenario from occurring.

Given that production of WCSB and Bakken crude oil will proceed with
or without the proposed Project, the denial of a Presidential Permit
would likely result in actions by other firms in the United States
(and global) petroleum market, such as use of alternative modes to
transport WCSB and Bakken crude oil. Table ES-4 compares some of
the key characteristics of the non-Status Quo scenarios under this
Alternative to the proposed Project. The individual scenarios are
described below.

**Table ES-4: Summary of No Action Alternative Scenarios**

**Characteristics Proposed**

**Project Rail and Pipeline Rail and Vessela**

New Acreage Required (permanent easement) 5,303 7,727 9,427 Average
Annual U.S. Employment During Construction 3,900 2,400 0

Construction Period 1-2 about 2 about 2 Permanent (Operations)
U.S. Employment 35 65 0 a In the Rail and Vessel scenario,
characteristics of the marine terminal in Kitimat are based
on the capital costs and employment estimates for the Enbridge
Northern Gateway marine terminal. Information is available at
http://gatewaypanel.review-examen.gc.ca/clf-nsi/dcmnt/pplctn-eng.html

*ES.6.3.1 Rail and Pipeline Scenario*

Under this scenario, WCSB and Bakken crude oil (in the form of dilbit
or synbit) would be shipped via railroad to Stroud, Oklahoma, where
it would be loaded into existing and expanded pipelines approximately
17 miles to Cushing, Oklahoma, where the crude oil would enter the
existing Keystone pipeline system.

This scenario would require the construction of seven new rail
loading terminals in Lloydminster, Saskatchewan (the possible loading
point for WCSB crude oil), one in Epping, North Dakota (the possible
loading point for Bakken crude oil), and seven in Stroud (see Figure
ES-12). Each new terminal would require approximately 500 acres of
land, as well as new track, pipelines, and storage tanks.

Assuming shipment via Class I (major) railroads such as the Canadian
Pacific Railway System (CPRS), Canadian National, BNSF Railway
(BNSF),and Union Pacific (UP), the distance from Lloydminster to Stroud
is approximately 1,900 to 2,000 miles. The route from Epping to Stroud
is approximately 1,350 miles. This scenario would require a total of
approximately 15 unit trains (one train with 100 rail cars) per day.

**Figure ES-12: Typical Rail Loading Facility in North Dakota**

*ES.6.3.2 Rail and Tanker Scenario*

A second transportation method would include shipping crude oil from
Alberta to a western Canada port, and then via oil tanker to Gulf
Coast markets. Under this scenario, WCSB dilbit or synbit would be
shipped via rail (CPRS or Canadian National) from Lloydminster to
Prince Rupert, British Columbia, where it would be loaded onto Suezmax
vessels (capable of carrying approximately 986,000 bbl of WCSB crude
oil) to the Gulf Coast (Houston and/or Port Arthur) via the Panama
Canal. Bakken crude would be shipped to Stroud via BNSF or UP rail
lines. Bakken crude oil would be transported by rail, as described
under the Rail and Pipeline Scenario. This scenario would require
13 unit trains (trains consisting of approximately 100 cars carrying
the same material and destined for the same location) per day between
Lloydminster and Prince Rupert, and 1 to 2 unit trains per day between
Epping and Stroud. This scenario would require the construction of
seven rail loading facilities in Lloydminster. Required facilities
in Prince Rupert would include seven unloading facilities and a new
marine terminal and storage terminal encompassing approximately 4,700
acres and capable of accommodating two Suezmax vessels. For the Bakken
crude portion of this Scenario, one rail terminal would be required
in Epping and Stroud.

**ES.6.4 Major Pipeline Route Alternatives**

The Department considered potential alternative pipeline routes
to assess whether or not route alternatives could avoid or reduce
impacts to environmentally sensitive resources while also meeting the
proposed Project's purpose. The two route alternatives evaluated in
the draft Supplemental EIS are described below. Table ES-5 summarizes
key aspects of the major pipeline route alternatives.

**Table ES-5: Summary of Major Pipeline Route Alternatives**

**Proposed Project**

**2011 Steele City Segment Alternative**

**I-90 Corridor Alternative**

New Pipeline Length (miles) 875 854 927 Number of Aboveground
Facilities 59 56 90 Length Co-Located with Existing Keystone Pipeline
(miles) 0 0 254 NDEQ-Identified Sand Hills Region Crossed (miles) 0
90 0 Highly Erodible Soil (Wind) Crossed (miles) 66 116 36 Perennial
Waterbody Crossings 56 48 61 Wetland Affected during Construction
(acres) 262 544 223 Average Annual Employment During Construction
3,900 3,900 4,100 Property Tax Revenues (millions) $34.5 $34.1 $38.4
Construction Land Area Affected (acres) 11,667 11,387 12,360 Operations
(Permanent) Land Area Required (acres) 5,303 5,176 4,818

*ES.6.4.1 2011 Steele City Segment Alternative*

The Keystone XL 2011 Steele City Segment Alternative evaluates the
impacts of constructing the route proposed in the August 2011 Final
EIS as a comparison against which other route alternatives, including
the proposed Project, can be made. This alternative would follow
Keystone's proposed Project route from the Canadian border milepost
(MP 0) south to approximately MP 204 where it would connect with the
proposed Bakken Marketlink Project onramp at the same location as the
proposed Project, and continue to approximately MP 615 in northern
Nebraska near the South Dakota border.

At that location, the Keystone XL 2011 Steele City Segment Alternative
would divert from the current proposed Project and would continue
southeasterly for another 240 miles to the southern terminus at
Steele City, Nebraska. For approximately 90 miles, the Keystone XL
2011 Steele City Segment Alternative would cross the NDEQ-identified
Sand Hills Region.

*ES.6.4.2 I-90 Corridor Alternative*

Keystone's proposed Project route starts at the Canadian Border
(MP 0) and stretches south through the state of Montana into South
Dakota to approximately MP 516, where the proposed pipeline route
intersects Interstate 90 (I-90). From this point, this alternative
pipeline route would follow the ROW of I-90 and State Highway 262
for 157 miles, where it would then intersect and follow the ROW of
the existing Keystone pipeline to Steele City.

The I-90 Corridor would avoid crossing the NDEQ- identified Sand Hills
Region and would reduce the length of pipeline crossing the Northern
High Plains Aquifer system, which includes the Ogallala formation.

**ES.6.5 Other Alternatives Considered**

*ES.6.5.1 Route Variations*

In addition to the route alternatives, the Department reviewed proposed
variations---relatively short deviations---to the proposed route
that avoid or minimize construction impacts to specific resources
(cultural resource sites, wetlands, recreational lands, residences,
etc.) or that minimize constructability issues (shallow bedrock,
difficult waterbody crossings, steep terrain, etc.).

*ES.6.5.2 Alternative Pipeline Design*

In response to public comments, the Department considered two
alternative pipeline designs: an aboveground pipeline and an
alternative using smaller-diameter pipe. The Department determined
that both alternative designs were not reasonable alternatives for
the proposed Project; they were not considered further in the draft
Supplemental EIS.

ES.7 **NEXT STEPS**

A Notice of Availability---indicating that the draft Supplemental EIS
is available for public review---has been published in the Federal
Register and distributed to participating federal and state agencies,
elected officials, media organizations, Native American tribes,
private landowners, and other interested parties. Printed copies have
also been distributed to public libraries.

As part of the EIS process, members of the public, public agencies,
and other interested parties are encouraged to submit comments,
questions, and concerns about the project via e-mail to

**keystonecomments@state.gov**, at
http://www.keystonepipeline-xl.state.gov/, or by mail to:

**U.S. Department of State Attn: Genevieve Walker, NEPA Coordinator
2201 C Street NW Room 2726 Washington, D.C. 20520**

Where appropriate, the draft Supplemental EIS will be revised in
response to public comments, and the revised document will be published
as the Final Supplemental EIS. The Department's determination of
whether the proposed Project is in the national interest would follow
publication of the Final Supplemental EIS.
