**ES.1.0 OVERVIEW OF REVIEW**

**PROCESS**

The Keystone XL Pipeline (the proposed Project) is a proposed
875-mile pipeline project that would extend from Morgan, Montana,
to Steele City, Nebraska. The pipeline would allow delivery of up to
830,000 barrels per day (bpd) of crude oil from the Western Canadian
Sedimentary Basin (WCSB) in Canada and the Bakken Shale Formation
in the United States to Steele City, Nebraska, for onward delivery
to refineries in the Gulf Coast area (see Figure ES-1). TransCanada
Keystone Pipeline, LP (Keystone) has applied for a Presidential Permit
that, if granted, would authorize the proposed pipeline to cross the
United States-Canadian border at Morgan, Montana.

The proposed route differs from the route analyzed in the 2011 Final
Environmental Impact Statement (2011 Final EIS) in that it would avoid
the environmentally sensitive Nebraska Department of Environmental
Quality (NDEQ)-identified Sand Hills Region and no longer includes
a southern segment from Cushing, Oklahoma, to the Gulf Coast area.

The U.S. Department of State (the Department) prepared this Final
Supplemental Environmental Impact Statement (the Supplemental EIS)
to assess the potential impacts associated with the proposed Project
and its alternatives. The Supplemental EIS takes into consideration
over 400,000 comments received during the scoping period and 1.5
million comments received on the Draft Supplemental EIS issued in
March 2013. Notable changes since the Draft Supplemental EIS include:

• Expanded analysis of potential oil releases;

• Expanded climate change analysis;

• Updated oil market analysis incorporating new economic modeling;
and

• Expanded analysis of rail transport as part of the No Action
Alternative scenarios.

**ES.1.1 Presidential Permit Process**

For proposed petroleum pipelines that cross international borders
of the United States, the President, through Executive Order (EO)
13337, directs the Secretary of State to decide whether a project
serves the national interest before granting a Presidential Permit.

To make this decision (i.e., the National Interest Determination),
the Secretary of State, through the Department, considers many
factors, including energy security; environmental, cultural, and
economic impacts; foreign policy; and compliance with relevant state
and federal regulations. This Supplemental EIS was produced consistent
with the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) and will help inform
that determination. Before making such a decision, the Department also
asks for the views of eight federal agencies identified in EO 13337:
the Departments of Energy, Defense, Transportation, Homeland Security,
Justice, Interior, and Commerce, as well as the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency (USEPA).

If the proposed Project is determined to serve the national interest,
it will be granted a Presidential Permit that authorizes the
construction, connection, operation, and maintenance of the facilities
at the border between the United States and Canada. The applicant would
be required to abide by certain conditions listed in this Supplemental
EIS and the Presidential Permit. The Department's primary role is
to make a National Interest Determination. Its jurisdiction does not
include selection of specific pipeline routes within the United States.

In addition, the Department acts consistent with the National Historic
Preservation Act (NHPA) and the Endangered Species Act (ESA) as part
of its comprehensive NEPA consistent review.

**ES.1.2 Background**

Keystone's first application for the Keystone XL pipeline was submitted
on September 19, 2008, and a Final EIS was published on August 26,
2011. The route proposed included the same U.S.-Canada border crossing
as the currently proposed Project but a different pipeline route in
the United States. The 2011 Final EIS route traversed a substantial
portion of the Sand Hills Region of Nebraska, as identified by
the NDEQ. Moreover, the 2011 Final EIS route went from Montana to
Steele City, Nebraska, and then from Cushing, Oklahoma, to the Gulf
Coast area.

**Figure ES-1 Proposed Keystone XL Project Route**

In November 2011, the Department determined that additional
information was needed to fully evaluate the application---in
particular, information about alternative routes within Nebraska
that would avoid the NDEQ- identified Sand Hills Region. In late
December 2011, Congress adopted a provision of the Temporary Payroll
Tax Cut Continuation Act that sought to require the President to make
a decision on the Presidential Permit for the 2011 Final EIS route
within 60 days. That deadline did not allow sufficient time to prepare
a rigorous, transparent, and objective review of an alternative route
through Nebraska. As such, the Presidential Permit was denied.

In February 2012, Keystone informed the Department that it considered
the Gulf Coast portion of the originally proposed pipeline project
(from Cushing, Oklahoma, to the Gulf Coast area) to have independent
economic utility, and indicated that it intended to proceed with
construction of that pipeline as a separate project, the Gulf Coast
Project (see Figure ES-2). The Gulf Coast Project did not require
a Presidential Permit because it does not cross an international
border. Construction on the Gulf Coast Project was recently completed.

On May 4, 2012, Keystone filed a new Presidential Permit application
for the Keystone XL Project. The proposed Project has a new route and
a new stated purpose and need. The new proposed route differs from the
2011 Final EIS Route in two significant ways: 1) it would avoid the
environmentally sensitive NDEQ- identified Sand Hills Region and 2) it
would terminate at Steele City, Nebraska. From Steele City, existing
pipelines would transport the crude oil to the Gulf Coast area. In
other words, the proposed Project no longer includes a southern
segment and instead runs from Montana to Steele City, Nebraska.

In addition to the NDEQ-identified Sand Hills Region, the proposed
Project route would avoid other areas in Nebraska (including portions
of Keya Paha County) that have been identified by the NDEQ as having
soil and topographic characteristics similar to the Sand Hills
Region. The proposed Project route would also avoid or move further
away from water wellhead protection areas for the villages of Clarks
and Western, Nebraska. Figure ES-3 compares the 2011 Final EIS route
and the proposed Project route.

The proposed route in Montana and South Dakota is largely unchanged
from the route analyzed in the 2011 Final EIS except for minor
modifications that Keystone made to improve constructability and in
response to landowner requests (see Figure ES-3).

The Department, after discussions with the USEPA and the Council on
Environmental Quality (CEQ), determined consistent with NEPA that
issuance of the new Presidential Permit would constitute a major
federal action that may have significant environmental impact, and
that it would prepare a supplement to the 2011 Final EIS for the
new application. This Supplemental EIS provides a thorough analysis
of the environmental impacts from the proposed Project; it has been
revised, expanded, and updated to include a comprehensive review of
the new route in Nebraska as well as any significant new circumstances
or information that is now available and relevant to the overall
proposed Project.

To assist in preparing this Supplemental EIS, the Department retained
an environmental consulting firm, Environmental Resources Management
(ERM). ERM was selected pursuant to the Department's interim guidance
on the selection of independent third-party contractors. This guidance
is designed to ensure that no conflicts of interest exist between the
contractor and the applicant and that any perceived conflicts that
would impair the public's confidence in the integrity of the work are
mitigated or removed. ERM works at the sole and exclusive instruction
of the Department and is not permitted to communicate with Keystone
unless specifically directed to do so by Department officials.

On June 15, 2012, through a Notice of Intent, the Department solicited
public comments for consideration in establishing the scope and content
of this Supplemental EIS. The scoping period extended from June 15 to
July 30, 2012. In total, an estimated 406,712 letters, cards, emails,
e-comments, or telephone conversation records (henceforth referred
to as submissions) were received from the public, agencies, and other
interested groups and stakeholders during the scoping period. In March
2013, the Department issued a Draft Supplemental EIS that included
new analysis and analysis built upon the work completed in the 2011
Final EIS, as well as the estimated 406,712 submissions mentioned
above that were received during the 2012 scoping process.

**Figure ES-2 Gulf Coast Project Route**

Note: The 2011 Final EIS route is also referred to in this Final
Supplemental EIS as the 2011 Steele City Segment Alternative.

**Figure ES-3 Comparison of Proposed Project to 2011 Final EIS Route**

**ES.1.3 Public Comments Received**

**Regarding the Draft**

**Supplemental EIS**

Following publication of the 2013 Draft Supplemental EIS, the
Department invited the public to comment on the document. Electronic
versions were made available for download, and hard copies were made
available in public libraries along the proposed pipeline route. Hard
and electronic copies of the Draft Supplemental EIS were sent to
interested Indian tribes, agencies, elected and appointed officials,
non-governmental organizations (NGOs), and other parties. The
Department also solicited input at a public meeting held on April 18,
2013 in Grand Island, Nebraska. In total, the Department received
an estimated 1,513,249 submissions during the public comment period
for the Draft Supplemental EIS. Submissions were made by federal,
state, and local representatives, members of the public, government
agencies, Indian tribes, NGOs, and other interested groups and
stakeholders. Submissions made by the public on the Draft Supplemental
EIS were posted on www.regulations.gov.

Of this total number of submissions, an estimated 1,496,396 submissions
(99 percent of the total) were form letters sponsored by NGOs. The
remaining 16,853 submissions were identified as unique submissions. All
submissions were evaluated and addressed, as appropriate, in this
Supplemental EIS. Some of the most frequent comment topics included:

• Concerns that the 2013 Draft Supplemental EIS did not adequately
address the greenhouse gas (GHG) and climate change effects of the
extraction, processing, and use of the crude oil that the proposed
Project would carry;

• Concerns that potential releases from the proposed Project (i.e.,
spills) could pollute major groundwater resources such as the Ogallala
Aquifer;

• Concerns that the 2013 Draft Supplemental EIS did not adequately
address the impacts of bitumen extraction in Canada;

• Concerns about the contractor and subcontractor selection process
for preparing this Supplemental EIS;

• Concerns that the crude oil transportation market was not
adequately analyzed;

• Suggestions that the existing Keystone Pipeline right-of-way (ROW)
be considered in lieu of the currently proposed pipeline route; and

• Questions about the accuracy of job creation estimates for
construction and operation of the proposed Project, as well as the
types, locations, and hiring preferences of those jobs.

**ES.1.4 About the Final Supplemental EIS**

This Supplemental EIS for the proposed Keystone XL pipeline project
builds on the analysis provided in the 2011 Final EIS and the 2013
Draft Supplemental EIS and is now available for download by the
public. Moreover, this Supplemental EIS has been distributed to
participating federal and state agencies, elected officials, media
organizations, Indian tribes, private landowners, and other interested
parties. Printed copies have also been distributed to public libraries
along the proposed pipeline route.

In completing this Supplemental EIS, the Department took into
consideration the over 1.5 million submissions received. In response
to these comments, the Department has revised the text from the
2013 Draft Supplemental EIS for the proposed Project. This Final
Supplemental EIS includes the latest available information on the
proposed Project resulting from ongoing discussions with federal,
state, and local agencies. It also describes updated analysis of the
potential effects (including direct, indirect, and cumulative effects)
of the proposed Project and alternatives on various resources. The
analysis reflects inputs from other U.S. government agencies and was
reviewed through an interagency process.

**ES.2.0 OVERVIEW OF PROPOSED**

**PROJECT**

**ES.2.1 Proposed Project Purpose and Need**

According to the application submitted by Keystone, the primary
purpose of the proposed Project is to provide the infrastructure to
transport crude oil from the border with Canada to delivery points in
the United States (primarily to the Gulf Coast area) by connecting to
existing pipeline facilities near Steele City, Nebraska. The proposed
Project is meant to respond to the market demand of refineries for
crude oil of the kind found in Western Canada (often called *heavy*
crude oil). The proposed Project would also provide transportation
for the kind of crude oil found within the Bakken formation of North
Dakota and Montana (often called *light* crude oil).

The proposed Project would have the capacity to deliver up to 830,000
bpd, of which 730,000 bpd of capacity has been set aside for WCSB
crude oil and the remaining 100,000 bpd of capacity set aside for
Williston Basin (Bakken) crude oil. Keystone has represented that
it has firm commitments to transport approximately 555,000 bpd of
heavy crude oil from producers in the WCSB, as well as 65,000 bpd of
crude oil from the Bakken. The ultimate mixture and quantity of crude
oils transported by the proposed Project over its lifetime would be
determined by market demand.

There is existing demand for crude oil---particularly heavy crude
oil---at refiners in the Gulf Coast area, but the ultimate disposition
of crude oil that would be transported by the proposed Project,
as well as any refined products produced from that crude oil, would
also be determined by market demand and applicable law.

**ES.2.2 Proposed Project Description**

The proposed Project would consist of approximately 875 miles of
new 36-inch-diameter pipeline and related facilities for transport
of WCSB and Bakken crude oil, the latter from an oil terminal near
Baker, Montana. Crude oil carried in the proposed Project would be
delivered to existing pipeline facilities near Steele City, Nebraska,
for onward delivery to refineries in the Gulf Coast area. The proposed
Project would also include two pump stations (one new and one expanded)
along the existing Keystone Pipeline in Kansas (see Figure ES-5).

Construction of the proposed Project would include the pipeline itself
plus various aboveground ancillary facilities (e.g., access roads,
pump stations, and construction camps) and connected actions. Figure
ES-4 illustrates the construction sequence that would be followed
for the proposed Project.

Construction of the proposed Project would generally require
a 110-foot-wide temporary ROW and is expected to last 1 to 2
years. After construction, the proposed Project would generally
maintain a 50-foot- wide permanent ROW easement over the pipeline in
Montana (approximately 285 miles), South Dakota (approximately 316
miles), and Nebraska (approximately 274 miles).

Keystone would have access to property within the easement, but
property owners would retain the ability to farm and conduct other
limited activities within the easement. The permanent aboveground
ancillary facilities would include electrically operated pump stations,
mainline valves, and permanent access roads.

**Figure ES-4 Keystone XL, Typical Pipeline Construction Sequence**

**Figure ES-5 Proposed Project Overview**

The U.S. portion of the proposed Project is estimated to cost
approximately $3.3 billion, and would be paid for by Keystone. If
permitted, the pipeline would begin operation approximately 2 years
after final approvals were received, with the actual in-service date
dependent on construction as well as obtaining any additional permits,
approvals, and authorizations necessary before operations can commence.

**ES.2.2.1 The Bakken Marketlink Project**

Keystone Marketlink, LLC, a wholly owned subsidiary of TransCanada
Pipelines Limited, would construct and operate the Bakken Marketlink
Project. This project would include a 5-mile pipeline, pumps,
meters, and storage tanks to supply Bakken crude oil to the proposed
pipeline from the Bakken Marketlink pipeline system in North Dakota
and Montana. Two crude oil storage tanks would be built near Baker,
Montana, as part of this project. This project would be able to deliver
up to 100,000 bpd of crude oil, and has commitments for approximately
65,000 bpd.

**ES.2.2.2 Big Bend to Witten 230-kV**

**Electrical Transmission Line**

The Western Area Power Administration (Western) has determined that
providing reliable electricity for operation of the proposed Project
requires the construction of a new 230-kilovolt (kV) transmission line
originating at the Fort Thompson/Big Bend Dam area in South Dakota
and extending south to the existing Witten Substation, near Pump
Stations 20 and 21. To meet these demands, Western would repurpose
existing transmission infrastructure and construct new infrastructure
between the Big Bend Dam and a proposed Big Bend Substation. The
Basin Electric Power Cooperative would construct a new 76-mile, 230-kV
transmission line from the Big Bend Substation to the existing Witten
Substation, and would operate both the transmission line and the Big
Bend Substation.

**ES.2.2.3 Electrical Distribution Lines and**

**Substations**

Electrical power for the proposed Project would be obtained from local
power providers. These power providers would construct the necessary
substations and transformers, and would either use existing service
lines or construct new service lines to deliver electrical power to
the specified point of use (e.g., pump stations and mainline valves),
which would be located at intervals along the proposed Project route.

**ES.3.0 OVERVIEW OF PETROLEUM**

**MARKETS**

The scope and content of the market analysis in this Supplemental
EIS were informed by public and interagency comments as well as new
information that was not previously available. Among the notable
updates to this analysis are revised modeling to incorporate evolving
market conditions, more extensive information on the logistics and
economics of crude by rail, and a more detailed analysis of supply
costs to inform conclusions about production implications.

The updated market analysis in this Supplemental EIS---similar to
the market analysis sections in the 2011 Final EIS and 2013 Draft
Supplemental EIS--- concludes that the proposed Project is unlikely
to significantly affect the rate of extraction in oil sands areas
(based on expected oil prices, oil-sands supply costs, transport costs,
and supply-demand scenarios). The Department conducted this analysis,
drawing on a wide variety of data and leveraging external expertise.

**ES.3.1 Summary of Market Analysis**

The 2011 Final EIS was developed contemporaneously with the start of
strong growth in domestic light crude oil supply from so-called *tight*
oil formations, such as those formations found in North Dakota's Bakken
region. Domestic production of crude oil has increased significantly,
from approximately 5.5 million bpd in 2010 to 6.5 million bpd in 2012
and 7.5 million bpd by mid-2013. Rising domestic crude production
is predominantly light crude, and it has replaced foreign imports
of light crude oil. However, demand persists for imported heavy
crude by U.S. refineries that are optimized to process that kind of
oil. Meanwhile, Canadian production of bitumen from the oil sands
continues to grow, the vast majority of which is currently exported to
the United States to be processed by U.S. refineries that want heavy
crude oil. North American production growth and logistics constraints
have contributed to significant discounts on the price of landlocked
crude and have led to growing volumes of crude shipped by rail in
the United States and, more recently, Canada.

Both the 2011 Final EIS and the Draft Supplemental EIS published in
March 2013 discussed the transportation of Canadian crude by rail as a
possibility. Due to market developments since then, this Supplemental
EIS notes that the transportation of Canadian crude by rail is already
occurring in substantial volumes. It is estimated that approximately
180,000 bpd of Canadian crude oil is already traveling by rail (see
Figure ES-6).

200,000 **B**

**Figure ES-6 Estimated Crude Oil Transported by Rail from WCSB, bpd**

The industry has been making significant investments in increasing
rail transport capacity for crude oil out of the WCSB. Figure ES-7
illustrates the increase in rail loading and unloading terminals
between 2010 and 2013. Rail loading facilities in the WCSB are
estimated to have a capacity of approximately 700,000 bpd of crude
oil, and by the end of 2014 this will likely increase to more than
1.1 million bpd. Most of this capacity (approximately 900,000 to
1 million bpd) is in areas that produce primarily heavy crude oil
(both conventional and oil sands), or is being connected by pipelines
to those oil production areas.

Various uncertainties underlie the projections upon which this
Supplemental EIS partially relies. In recognition of the uncertainty
of future market conditions, the analysis included updated modeling
about the sensitivity of the market to some of these elements.

Updated information on rail transportation and oil market trends,
particularly rising U.S. oil production, was incorporated in oil
market modeling. This modeling was developed in response to comments
received on the Draft Supplemental EIS. To help account for key
uncertainties about oil production, consumption, and transportation,
the modeling examined 16 different scenarios that combine various
supply-demand assumptions and pipeline constraints. Modeled cases
test supply and demand projections based on the official energy
forecasts of independent U.S. Energy Information Administration's
(EIA) 2013 Annual Energy Outlook that correspond to uncertainties
raised in public comments, including potential higher- than-expected
U.S. supply, lower-than-expected U.S. demand, and higher-than-expected
oil production in Latin America.

Note: These estimates do not include a facility being constructed
in Edmonton, Canada, with a design capacity of 250,000 bpd (100,000
bpd expected to be operational by the end of 2014) that was announced
shortly before this Supplemental EIS was completed. In addition, Altex
Energy has plans for a 55,000 bpd loading facility in Vermillion,
Alberta.

**Figure ES-7 Crude by Train Loading and Off-Loading Facilities in 2010
(top map) and 2013**

**(bottom map)**

The supply-demand cases were paired with four pipeline configuration
scenarios: an unconstrained scenario that allows pipelines to be
built without restrictions; a scenario in which no new cross-border
pipeline capacity to U.S. markets is permitted, but pipelines from
the WSCB to Canada's east and west coasts are built; a scenario
where new cross-border capacity between the United States and Canada
is permitted, but Canadian authorities do not permit new east-west
pipelines; and a constrained scenario that assumes no new or expanded
pipelines carrying WCSB crude are built in any direction.

Updated model results indicated that cross-border pipeline constraints
have a limited impact on crude flows and prices. If additional
east-west pipelines were built to the Canadian coasts, such pipelines
would be heavily utilized to export oil sands crude due to relatively
low shipping costs to reach growing Asian markets. If new east-west
and cross-border pipelines were both completely constrained, oil
sands crude could reach U.S. and Canadian refineries by rail.

Varying pipeline availability has little impact on the prices that
U.S. consumers pay for refined products such as gasoline or for heavy
crude demand in the Gulf Coast. When this demand is not met by heavy
Canadian supplies in the model results, it is met by heavy crude from
Latin America and the Middle East.

Conclusions about the potential effects of pipeline constraints on
production levels were informed by comparing modeled oil prices to the
prices that would be required to support expected levels of oil sands
capacity growth. Figure ES-8 illustrates existing oil sands capacity,
the estimated supply costs of announced capacity, and the capacity
growth that will be required to meet EIA and Canadian Association of
Petroleum Producers production projections. Projected prices generally
exceed supply costs for the projects responsible for future oil sands
production growth. Modeling results indicate that severe pipeline
constraints reduce the prices received by bitumen producers by up to
$8/bbl, but not enough to curtail most oil sands growth plans or to
shut-in existing production (based on expected oil prices, oil-sands
supply costs, transport costs, and supply-demand scenarios). These
conclusions are based on conservative assumptions about rail costs,
which likely overstate the cost penalty producers pay for shipping
by rail if more economic methods currently under consideration to
ship bitumen by rail are utilized.

Several analysts and financial institutions have stated that denying
the proposed Project would have significant impacts on oil sands
production. To the extent that other assessments appear to differ from
the analysis in this report, they typically do so because they have
different focuses, near-term time scales, or production expectations,
and/or include less detailed data and analysis about rail than this
report. While short-term physical transportation constraints introduce
uncertainty to industry outlooks over the next decade, new data and
analysis in Section 1.4, Market Analysis, indicate that rail will
likely be able to accommodate new production if new pipelines are
delayed or not constructed.

Over the long term, lower-than-expected oil prices could affect the
outlook for oil sands production, and in certain scenarios higher
transportation costs resulting from pipeline constraints could
exacerbate the impacts of low prices. The primary assumptions required
to create conditions under which production growth would slow due
to transportation constraints include: 1) that prices persist below
current or most projected levels in the long run; and 2) that all new
and expanded Canadian and cross-border pipeline capacity, beyond just
the proposed Project, is not constructed.

Above approximately $75 per barrel for West Texas Intermediate
(WTI)-equivalent oil, revenues to oil sands producers are likely to
remain above the long-run supply costs of most projects responsible
for expected levels of oil sands production growth. Transport
penalties could reduce the returns to producers and, as with any
increase in supply costs, potentially affect investment decisions
about individual projects on the margins. However, at these prices,
enough relatively low-cost *in situ* projects are under development
that baseline production projections would likely be met even with
constraints on new pipeline capacity. Oil sands production is expected
to be most sensitive to increased transport costs in a range of prices
around $65 to $75 per barrel. Assuming prices fell in this range,
higher transportation costs could have a substantial impact on oil
sands production levels--- possibly in excess of the capacity of the
proposed Project---because many *in situ* projects are estimated to
break even around these levels. Prices below this range would challenge
the supply costs of many projects, regardless of pipeline constraints,
but higher transport costs could further curtail production.

Note: The green shaded areas in the *Current and Announced Project Peak
Capacity* represent the capacity of projects that are operating or
already under construction, which are expected to continue producing
and/or remain under development as long as oil prices are above
operating costs. The purple shaded areas represent the capacity of
potential projects that would likely only go forward with oil prices
above the stated ranges.

**Figure ES-8 Oil Sands Supply Costs (West Texas
Intermediate-Equivalent Dollars per Barrel),**

**Project Capacity, and Production Projections**

Oil prices are volatile, particularly over the short-term. In addition,
long-term trends, which drive investment decisions, are difficult
to predict. Specific supply cost thresholds, Canadian production
growth forecasts, and the amount of new capacity needed to meet them
are uncertain. As a result, the price threshold above which pipeline
constraints are likely to have a limited impact on future production
levels could change if supply costs or production expectations prove
different than estimated in this analysis.

The dominant drivers of oil sands development are more global than
any single infrastructure project. Oil sands production and investment
could slow or accelerate depending on oil price trends, regulations,
and technological developments, but the potential effects of those
factors on the industry's rate of expansion should not be conflated
with the more limited effects of individual pipelines.

**ES.4.0 ENVIRONMENTAL**

**ANALYSIS OF THE**

**PROPOSED PROJECT**

The Department evaluated the potential construction and operational
impacts of the proposed Project and alternatives across a wide range
of environmental resources. The analysis discusses public and agency
interests and concerns as reflected in the submissions received
during the scoping period and on the 2013 Draft Supplemental EIS,
and includes:

• Climate change, including lifecycle (well-to- wheels [WTW])
GHG emissions associated with oil sands development, refining,
and consumption;

• Potential releases or spills of oil;

• Socioeconomics, including the potential job and revenue benefits of
the proposed Project, as well as concerns about environmental justice;

• Water resources, including potential effects on groundwater
aquifers (e.g., Ogallala Aquifer) and surface waters;

• Wetlands;

• Threatened and endangered species;

• Potential effects on geology, soils, other biological resources
(e.g., vegetation, fish, and wildlife), air quality, noise, land use,
recreation, and visual resources; and

• Cultural resources, including tribal consultation.

**ES.4.1 Climate Change**

Changes to the Earth's climate have been observed over the past century
with a global temperature increase of 1.5 degrees Fahrenheit between
1880 and 2012. This warming has coincided with increased levels of
GHGs in the atmosphere. In order for the Earth's heat and energy
to remain at a steady state, the solar energy that is incoming must
equal the energy that is radiated into space (see Figure ES-9). GHGs
contribute to trapping outbound radiation within the troposphere
(the layer of the atmosphere closest to the Earth's surface), and
this is called the greenhouse effect.

**Figure ES-9 The Greenhouse Effect**

Since the beginning of the Industrial Revolution, the rate and amount
of GHGs have increased as a result of human activity. The additional
GHGs intensify the greenhouse effect, resulting in a greater amount of
heat being trapped within the atmosphere. The Intergovernmental Panel
on Climate Change, a group of 1,300 independent scientific experts
from countries around the world, in its Fifth Assessment Report
concludes that global warming in the climate system is unequivocal
based on measured increases in temperature, decrease in snow cover,
and higher sea levels.

This Supplemental EIS evaluates the relationship between the proposed
Project with respect to GHG emissions and climate change from the
following perspectives:

• The GHG emissions associated with the construction and operation
of the proposed Project and its connected actions;

• The potential increase in indirect lifecycle (wells- to-wheels)
GHG emissions associated with the WCSB crude oil that would be
transported by the proposed Project;

• How the GHG emissions associated with the proposed Project
cumulatively contribute to climate change; and

• An assessment of the effects that future projected climate change
could have in the proposed Project area and on the proposed Project.

**ES.4.1.1 Greenhouse Gas Emissions from the**

**Proposed Project**

The proposed Project would emit approximately 0.24 million metric
tons of carbon dioxide (CO2) equivalents (MMTCO2e) per year during
the construction period. These emissions would be emitted directly
through fuel use in construction vehicles and equipment, as well as,
land clearing activities including open burning, and indirectly from
electricity usage.

During operations, approximately 1.44 MMTCO2e would be emitted per
year, largely attributable to electricity use for pump station power,
fuel for vehicles and aircraft for maintenance and inspections,
and fugitive methane emissions at connections. The 1.44 MMTCO2e
emissions would be equivalent to GHG emissions from approximately
300,000 passenger vehicles operating for 1 year, or 71,928 homes
using electricity for 1 year.

**ES.4.1.2 Lifecycle Analysis**

To enable a more comprehensive understanding of the potential indirect
GHG impact of the proposed Project, it is important to also consider
the wider GHG emissions associated with the crude oil being transported
by the proposed Project. A lifecycle approach was used to evaluate
the GHG implications of the WCSB crudes that would be transported by
the proposed Project compared to other crude oils that would likely
be replaced or displaced by those WCSB crudes in U.S. refineries. A
lifecycle analysis is a technique used to evaluate the environmental
aspects and impacts (in this case GHGs) that are associated with a
product, process, or service from raw materials acquisition through
production, use, and end-of-life. The lifecycle analysis considered
wells-to-wheels GHG emissions, including extraction, processing,
transportation, refining, and refined product use (such as combustion
of gasoline in cars) of WCSB crudes compared to other reference
heavy crudes. The lifecycle analysis also considered the implications
associated with other generated products during the lifecycle stages
(so-called *co-products*) such as petroleum coke. WCSB crudes are
generally more GHG intensive than other heavy crudes they would
replace or displace in U.S. refineries, and emit an estimated 17
percent more GHGs on a lifecycle basis than the average barrel of
crude oil refined in the United States in 2005. The largest single
source of GHG emissions in the lifecycle analysis is the finished-fuel
combustion of refined petroleum fuel products, which is consistent
for different crude oils, as shown in Figure ES-10.

The total lifecycle emissions associated with production, refining, and
combustion of 830,000 bpd of oil sands crude oil transported through
the proposed Project is approximately 147 to 168 MMTCO2e per year. The
annual lifecycle GHG emissions from 830,000 bpd of the four reference
crudes examined in this Supplemental EIS are estimated to be 124 to
159 MMTCO2e. The range of incremental GHG emissions for crude oil that
would be transported by the proposed Project is estimated to be 1.3 to
27.4 MMTCO2e annually. The estimated range of potential emissions is
large because there are many variables such as which reference crude
is used for the comparison and which study is used for the comparison.

2013 Current Baseline, 830,000 bpd of reference crude(s)

Incremental Emissions (excluding consideration of Market Analysis)

830,000 bpd oil sands production

Incremental GHG

Emissions **

Coproducts & net petroleum coke

Extraction and mining

Combustion and transportation

** Note: The orange bar represents incremental emissions. The bar
itself is for a single crude (Mexican Maya) from the TIAX study. The
range bar*

*is representative of all studies and reflects the 1.3 to 27.4 MMTCO2e
annual incremental emissions presented in the Final Supplemental EIS.*

*** Incremental Emissions: This represents the difference between the
2013 Current Baseline and the 830,000 bpd Oil Sands Production, and*

*excludes consideration of the Market Analysis. These Incremental
Emissions represent the potential increase in emissions attributable
to the*

*proposed Project if one assumed that approval or denial of the
proposed Project would directly result in a change in production of
830,000 bpd*

*of oil sands crudes in Canada. However, as set forth in Section 1.4,
Market Analysis, such a change is not likely to occur.*

Note: See Figure 4.14.3-7 in Section 4.14.3.5, Incremental GHG
Emissions, for a full description of the information presented in
this figure.

**Figure ES-10 Incremental Well-to-Wheels GHG Emissions from WCSB
Oil Sands Crudes**

**Compared to Well-to-Wheels GHG Emissions from Displacing Reference
Crudes**

The above estimates represent the total incremental emissions
associated with production and consumption of 830,000 bpd of oil sands
crude compared to the reference crudes. These estimates represent the
potential increase in emissions attributable to the proposed Project
if one assumed that approval or denial of the proposed Project would
directly result in a change in production of 830,000 bpd of oil
sands crudes in Canada (See Section 4.14.4.2, Emissions and Impacts
in Context, for additional information on emissions associated with
increases in oil sands production). However, as set forth in Section
1.4, Market Analysis, such a change is not likely to occur under
expected market conditions. Section 1.4 notes that approval or denial
of any one crude oil transport project, including the proposed Project,
is unlikely to significantly impact the rate of extraction in the oil
sands or the continued demand for heavy crude oil at refineries in the
United States based on expected oil prices, oil-sands supply costs,
transport costs, and supply-demand scenarios.

The 2013 Draft Supplemental EIS estimated how oil sands production
would be affected by long-term constraints on pipeline capacity (if
such constraints resulted in higher transportation costs) if long-term
WTI-equivalent oil prices were less than $100 per barrel. The Draft
Supplemental EIS also estimated a change in GHG emissions associated
with such changes in production. The additional data and analysis
included in this Supplemental EIS provide greater insights into
supply costs and the range of prices in which pipeline constraints
would be most likely to impact production. If WTI-equivalent prices
fell to around approximately $65 to $75 per barrel, if there were
long-term constraints on any new pipeline capacity, and if such
constraints resulted in higher transportation costs, then there could
be a substantial impact on oil sands production levels. As noted in
E.S.3.1, Summary of Market Analysis, this estimated price threshold
could change if supply costs or production expectations prove different
than estimated in this analysis. This is discussed in Section 1.4.5.4,
Implications for Production.

**ES.4.1.3 Climate Change Effects**

The total direct and indirect emissions associated with the proposed
Project would contribute to cumulative global GHG emissions. However,
emissions associated with the proposed Project are only one source of
relevant GHG emissions. In that way, GHG emissions differ from other
impact categories discussed in this Supplemental EIS in that all GHG
emissions of the same magnitude contribute to global climate change
equally, regardless of the source or geographic location where they
are emitted.

As part of this Supplemental EIS, future climate change scenarios
and projections developed by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change and peer- reviewed downscaled models were used to evaluate
the effects that climate change could have on the proposed Project,
as well as the environmental consequences from the proposed Project.

Assuming construction of the proposed Project were to occur in the
next few years, climate conditions during the construction period
would not differ substantially from current conditions. However,
during the subsequent operational time period, the following climate
changes are anticipated to occur regardless of any potential effects
from the proposed Project:

• Warmer winter temperatures;

• A shorter cool season;

• A longer duration of frost-free periods;

• More freeze-thaw cycles per year (which could lead to an increased
number of episodes of soil contraction and expansion);

• Warmer summer temperatures;

• Increased number of hot days and consecutive hot days; and

• Longer summers (which could lead to impacts associated with heat
stress and wildfire risks).

This Supplemental EIS assessed whether the projected changes in the
climate could further influence the impacts and effects attributable to
the proposed Project. Elevated effects due to projected climate change
could occur to water resources, wetlands, terrestrial vegetation,
fisheries, and endangered species, and could also contribute to air
quality impacts. In addition, the statistical risk of a pipeline spill
could be increased by secondary effects brought on by climatic change
such as increased flooding and drought. However, this increased risk
would still be much less than the risk of spills from other causes
(such as third-party damage). Climate change could have an effect
on the severity of a spill such that it could be reduced in drought
conditions but increased during periods of increased precipitation
and flooding.

**ES.4.2 Potential Releases**

The proposed Project would include processes, procedures, and systems
to prevent, detect, and mitigate potential oil spills.

Many commenters raised concerns regarding the potential environmental
effects of a pipeline release, leak, and/or spill. Impacts from
potential releases from the proposed Project were evaluated by
analyzing historical spill data. The analysis identified the types of
pipeline system components that historically have been the source of
spills, the sizes of those spills, and the distances those spills would
likely travel. The resulting potential impacts to natural resources,
such as surface waters and groundwater, were also evaluated as well
as planned mitigation measures designed to prevent, minimize, and
respond to spills.

**ES.4.2.1 Historical Pipeline Performance**

In response to numerous comments regarding pipeline performance,
the Department analyzed historical incident data within the PHMSA
and National Response Center incident databases to understand what
has occurred with respect to crude oil pipelines and the existing
Keystone Pipeline system.

Table ES-1 summarizes hazardous liquid pipeline incidents reported
to the PHMSA across the United States from January 2002 through July
2012 and shows the breakdown of incidents by pipeline component. A
total of 1,692 incidents occurred, of which 321 were pipe incidents
and 1,027 were involving different equipment components such as tanks,
valves, or pumps.

**Table ES-1 Summary of PHMSA Database Incidents a (January 2002 to
July 2012)**

**Incident Category Incidents Incident Sub-Category Incidents**

Crude oil pipeline 1,692

Crude oil mainline pipe incidents 321

Crude oil pipeline, equipment incidents (not mainline pipe) 1,027

Crude oil pipeline system, unspecified elements 344

Crude oil mainline pipe

16-inch or greater diameter 71

8-inch or 15-inch diameter 154

Less than 8-inch diameter 52

Diameter not provided 44

Crude oil pipeline, equipment (not mainline pipe)

Other discrete elements (pumps, fittings, etc.) 909

a *Incident* as used in the Final Supplemental EIS is in reference
to a PHMSA and/or a National Response Center record of a reportable
spill or accident found within their respective databases.

To assess the likelihood of releases from the proposed Project, risk
assessments were conducted addressing both the potential frequency of
releases and the potential crude oil spill volumes associated with
the releases. The assessments used three hypothetical spill volumes
(small, medium, and large scenarios) to represent the range of reported
spills in the PHMSA's spills database. Table ES-2 shows these spill
volumes and the probabilities of such volumes.

Most spills are small. Of the 1,692 incidents between 2002 and 2012
(shown in Table ES-1), 79 percent of the incidents were in the small
(zero to 50 bbl) range, equivalent to a spill of up to 2,100 gallons
(see Table ES-2). Four percent of the incidents were in the large
(greater than 1,000 bbl) range.

***ES.4.2.1.1* Small and Medium Spills**

The potential impacts from small spills of oil would typically be
confined to soil immediately surrounding the spill, and would have
little effect on nearby natural resources. These types of spills
would generally be detected by maintenance or operations personnel and
addressed through repair of the leak and remediation of the impacted
area by removal of impacted soil and cleaning of stained concrete or
containment areas.

With medium spills, a release could occur as a subsurface or surface
event depending upon the cause. Similar to a small spill, a slow
subsurface leak could potentially reach a groundwater resource and,
if the leak is faster than the soil can absorb the oil, could seep to
the ground surface. Once the migrating oil leaves the release site,
impacts to soil, vegetation, wildlife, and surface water along the flow
path would occur. Depending on how quickly it is remediated, some of
the oil might tend to pool in low areas and potentially infiltrate back
into the soil and to groundwater depending on the depth to groundwater.

***ES.4.2.1.2* Large Spills**

With a large spill, the majority of the spill volume would migrate
away from the release site. The potential impacts from a large spill
would be similar to the impacts from the medium-sized spill, but on
a much larger scale. More oil would seep into the soil over a larger
area and could infiltrate deeper into the soil. Once the spill reaches
the surface, the oil would flow following topographic gradient or lows
(e.g., gullies, roadside drainage ditches, culverts, or storm sewers)
and eventually to surface water features.

**Table ES-2 Spill Scenarios Evaluated in Supplemental EIS**

**Spill Volume Scenario Frequency a**

Small: Less than 50 bbl (2,100 gallons) 79%

Medium: 50--1,000 bbl (2,100--42,000 gallons) 17%

Large: >1,000 bbl (>42,000 gallons) 4%

a Indicates the share of all releases reported in the PHMSA database
that fit each spill volume scenario.

If the release enters flowing water or other surface water features,
the extent of the release could become very large, potentially
affecting soil, wildlife, and vegetation along miles of river and
shoreline. As has been seen in recent large spills, sinking oil can
be deposited in river or stream bottoms and become a continual source
of oil release over time.

**ES.4.2.2 Prevention and Mitigation**

In order to reduce the risk of spills, if permitted Keystone has
agreed to incorporate additional mitigation measures in the design,
construction, and operation of the proposed Keystone XL Project,
in some instances above what is normally required, including:

• 59 Special Conditions recommended by PHMSA;

• 25 mitigation measures recommended in the Battelle and Exponent
risk reports; and

• 11 additional mitigation measures.

Many of these mitigation measures relate to reductions in the
likelihood of a release occurring. Other measures provide mitigation
that reduces the consequences and impact of a spill should such
an event occur. Mitigation measures are compiled in Appendix Z,
Compiled Mitigation Measures, of this Supplemental EIS. Mitigation
measures are actions that, if the proposed Project is determined to
be in the national interest, Keystone would comply with as conditions
of a Presidential Permit.

If a spill occurred, the degree of impact to water, people, livestock,
soil, and other natural resources would depend on the distance from
the spill source. A large spill of 20,000 bbl, for example, could
have a combined overland and groundwater spreading of up to 2,264 feet
(or 0.42 miles) from a release point. Oil could spread on flat ground
up to 1,214 feet from the proposed pipeline, depending on the volume
spilled. If oil reached groundwater, components in the oil, such as
benzene, could spread in groundwater up to an additional 1,050 feet
downgradient (essentially, downhill underground and on land) of the
spill point.

The proposed Project would, if permitted, include processes,
procedures, and systems to prevent, detect, and mitigate potential
oil spills that could occur during construction and operation of
the pipeline. These would include a Spill Prevention, Control,
and Countermeasure Plan as well as a Construction, Mitigation, and
Reclamation Plan (CMRP). In the event of a large leak, Supervisory
Control and Data Acquisition sensors would automatically detect
noticeable changes in pipeline pressure and flow rates. Leaks and
spills could also be identified during routine aerial surveillance
along the pipeline ROW. In addition, Keystone would be required,
if permitted, to prepare an Emergency Response Plan that would
contain further detail on response procedures and would be reviewed
by the PHMSA prior to granting permission to operate the proposed
pipeline. Keystone would incorporate into these plans lessons learned
from past spills such as the pipeline rupture in 2010 that affected
the Kalamazoo River (Marshall, Michigan). For example, Keystone would,
if permitted, procure equipment required to respond to sunken and
submerged oil and ensure personnel are appropriately trained.

**ES.4.3 Socioeconomics**

**ES.4.3.1 Economic Activity Overview**

During construction, proposed Project spending would support
approximately 42,100 jobs (direct, indirect, and induced), and
approximately $2 billion in earnings throughout the United States. Of
these jobs, approximately 3,900 would be direct construction jobs
in the proposed Project area in Montana, South Dakota, Nebraska,
and Kansas (3,900 over 1 year of construction, or 1,950 per year
if construction took 2 years). Construction of the proposed Project
would contribute approximately $3.4 billion (or 0.02 percent) to the
U.S. gross domestic product (GDP). The proposed Project would generate
approximately 50 jobs during operations. Property tax revenue during
operations would be substantial for many counties, with an increase
of 10 percent or more in 17 of the 27 counties with proposed Project
facilities.

The jobs and earnings analysis recognizes three distinct components
of economic activity and job creation: direct, indirect, and induced.

• Direct economic activity associated with construction includes
all jobs and earnings at firms that are awarded contracts for goods
and services, including construction, directly by Keystone.

• Indirect economic activity includes all goods and services
purchased by these construction contractors in the conduct of
their services to the proposed Project. Examples of these types
of activities related to pipeline construction include the goods
and services purchased to produce inputs such as concrete, fuel,
surveying, welding materials, and earth-moving equipment.

• Induced economic activity includes the spending of earnings
received by employees working for either the construction contractor
or for any supplier of goods and services required in the construction
process. Examples of induced activities include spending by access
road construction crews, welders, employees of pipe manufacturers,
and ranchers providing beef for restaurants and construction camps.

**ES.4.3.2 Pipeline Geography, Population**

Of the land area near the proposed pipeline route, approximately 17
percent intersects areas with low- income or minority populations,
including Indian tribes. Such populations could potentially be
disproportionately affected by the proposed Project.

The proposed pipeline route would go through 27 counties: six in
Montana, nine in South Dakota, and 12 in Nebraska. These counties
are referred to as the *pipeline corridor counties* and would be
expected to experience most of the direct socioeconomic effects of
the proposed Project.

The 27 pipeline corridor counties are predominantly rural and sparsely
populated, with a total population of approximately 263,300 (2010
Census). Population density (number of persons per square mile) is low.

**ES.4.3.3 Economic Activity During**

**Construction**

Construction contracts, materials, and support purchased in the United
States would total approximately $3.1 billion. Another approximately
$233 million would be spent on construction camps for workers in
remote locations of Montana, South Dakota, and northern Nebraska.

Construction of the proposed Project would contribute approximately
$3.4 billion to the U.S. GDP. This figure includes not only earnings
by workers, but all other income earned by businesses and individuals
engaged in the production of goods and services demanded by the
proposed Project, such as profits, rent, interest, and dividends. When
compared with the GDP in 2012, the proposed Project's contribution
represents approximately 0.02 percent of annual economic activity
across the nation.

Construction spending would support a combined total of approximately
42,100 jobs throughout the United States for the up to 2-year
construction period. A *job* consists of one position that is filled
for one year. The term *support* means jobs ranging from new jobs
(i.e., not previously existing) to the continuity of existing jobs in
current or new locations. The specific number of jobs at any location
would result from the individual decisions of employers across the
country affected by the proposed Project based on their labor needs,
work backlog, and local hiring conditions. Of these jobs, approximately
16,100 would be direct jobs at firms that are awarded contracts for
goods and services, including construction, by Keystone. The other
approximately 26,000 jobs would result from indirect and induced
spending; this would consist of goods and services purchased by the
construction contractors and spending by employees working for either
the construction contractor or for any supplier of goods and services
required in the construction process.

About 12,000 jobs, or 29 percent of the total 42,100 jobs, would
be supported in Montana, South Dakota, Nebraska, and Kansas. Also,
of the 42,100 jobs, approximately 3,900 (or 1,950 per year if
construction took 2 years) would comprise a direct, temporary,
construction workforce in the proposed Project area.

Employment supported by construction of the proposed Project would
translate to approximately $2.05 billion in employee earnings. Of
this, approximately 20 percent ($405 million in earnings) would
be allocated to workers in the proposed Project area states. The
remaining 80 percent, or $1.6 billion, would occur in other locations
around the country.

**ES.4.3.4 Economic Activity During**

**Operations**

Once the proposed Project enters service, operations would require
approximately 50 total employees in the United States: 35 permanent
employees and 15 temporary contractors. This small number would result
in negligible impacts on population, housing, and public services in
the proposed Project area.

The total estimated property tax from the proposed Project in the first
full year of operations would be approximately $55.6 million spread
across 27 counties in three states. This impact to local property tax
revenue receipts would be substantial for many counties, constituting
a property tax revenue benefit of 10 percent or more in 17 of these
27 counties. Operation of the proposed Project is not expected to
have an impact on residential or agricultural property values.

**ES.4.4 Environmental Justice**

EO 12898, *Federal Actions to Address Environmental*

*Justice in Minority Populations and Low-Income*

*Populations,* directs federal agencies to identify and address,
as appropriate, disproportionately high and adverse health or
environmental effects of their programs, policies, and activities
on minority populations and low-income populations. Environmental
justice refers to the "fair treatment and meaningful involvement
of all people regardless of race, color, national origin, or income
with respect to the development, implementation, and enforcement of
environmental laws, regulations, and policies" (USEPA 2007). The CEQ
has provided guidance for addressing environmental justice.

Within the socioeconomic analysis area identified for the proposed
Project, 16 census groupings contain minority populations that are
meaningfully greater (equal or greater than 120 percent) than the share
in the surrounding state, and five census tracts have larger shares
of low-income populations. Four of these areas contain meaningfully
greater populations of both minority and low income residents. Two
minority populations are located on Indian lands: the Cheyenne River
Indian Reservation and the Rosebud Indian Reservation.

Impacts during construction could include exposure to construction dust
and noise, disruption to traffic patterns, and increased competition
for medical or health services. Typical proposed Project operations
are unlikely to disproportionately adversely impact the environmental
justice populations present. Because the risk of a potential release is
roughly equal at all points along the pipeline, the risks associated
with such releases would not be disproportionately borne by minority
or low-income populations. However, such populations could be more
vulnerable should a release occur.

If permitted, Keystone has agreed to avoidance and mitigation measures
to minimize negative impacts to all populations in the proposed Project
area. Specific mitigation for environmental justice communities during
construction would involve ensuring that adequate communication in
the form of public awareness materials regarding the construction
schedule and construction activities is provided.

**ES.4.5 Water Resources**

The proposed Project route would avoid surface water whenever possible,
but would cross approximately 1,073 surface waterbodies including
56 perennial rivers and streams as well as approximately 24 miles
of mapped floodplains. If permitted, Keystone would drill underneath
major rivers to mitigate construction impacts as described below and
in Section 4.3, Water Resources.

The proposed pipeline would cross important aquifers such as the
Northern High Plains Aquifer (NHPAQ) (which includes the Ogallala
Aquifer) and the Great Plains Aquifer (GPA). Modeling indicates that
aquifer characteristics would inhibit the spread of released oil,
and impacts from a release on water quality would be limited.

Nevertheless, within 1 mile of the proposed Project route are 2,537
wells, including 39 public water supply wells. Wells that are in the
vicinity could be affected by a release from the proposed Project.

**ES.4.5.1 Surface Water**

***ES.4.5.1.1* Construction**

Construction of the proposed Project could result in temporary and
permanent impacts such as:

• Stream sedimentation;

• Changes in stream channel morphology (shape) and stability;

• Temporary reduction in stream flow; and

• Potential for hazardous material spills.

Open-cut methods would be used at most waterbody crossings. However,
impacts to surface waterbodies would be mitigated through various
means. Horizontal directional drill (HDD) methods would be used at 14
major and sensitive waterbody crossings (see Figure ES-11). Waterbody
banks would be restored to preconstruction contours or to a stable
slope. Seeding, erosion control fabric, and other erosion control
measures would be installed, as specified in the CMRP and permit
documents.

***ES.4.5.1.2* Operations**

Surface water impacts associated with potential releases of crude
oil and other hazardous liquid spills are addressed in detail in
the Potential Releases section. Other potential impacts during the
operations phase would include:

• Channel migration or streambed degradation that exposes the
pipeline;

• Channel incision that increases bank heights to the point where
slopes are destabilized, ultimately widening the stream; and

• Sedimentation within a channel that triggers lateral bank erosion.

Mitigation measures to address these impacts would include those
specified in the CMRP. The proposed pipeline would be at least 5
feet below the bottom of waterbodies and at least 3 to 4 feet below
the bottom of waterbodies in rocky areas, and that depth would be
maintained at least 15 feet from either waterbody edge.

Where an HDD method is used, the crossing depth would be up to 55
feet below the stream bed. Potential bank protection measures could
include installing rock, wood, or other materials keyed into the bank
to provide protection from further erosion or regrading the banks to
reduce the bank slope.

**Figure ES-11 Cross Section of the Horizontal Directional Drilling
Method**

**ES.4.5.2 Floodplains**

The proposed pipeline would cross mapped and unmapped floodplains in
Montana, South Dakota, and Nebraska. In floodplain areas adjacent
to waterbody crossings, contours would be restored to as close to
previously existing contours as practical, and the disturbed area would
be revegetated during construction of the ROW in accordance with the
CMRP. After construction, the proposed pipeline would not obstruct
flows over designated floodplains, and any changes to topography
would be minimal and thus would not affect local flood elevations.

**ES.4.5.3 Groundwater**

The primary source of groundwater impacts from the proposed Project
would be potential releases of petroleum during pipeline operation and,
to a lesser extent, from fuel spills from equipment. Any petroleum
releases from construction or operation could potentially impact
groundwater where the overlying soils are permeable and/or the depth
to groundwater is shallow. Table ES-3 summarizes the anticipated
effects of potential releases from the proposed Project on aquifers
along the proposed Project route.

**ES.4.6 Wetlands**

The proposed Project would affect approximately 383 acres of
wetlands. Potential impacts include:

• Impacts to wetland functions and values;

• Conversion from one wetland type to another; and

• Permanent loss of wetlands due to fill for permanent
project-related facilities.

An estimated 2 acres of permanent wetland loss is
anticipated. Remaining wetlands affected by the proposed Project would
remain as functioning wetlands, provided that impact minimization
and restoration efforts described in the CMRP are successful.

Wetlands are regulated primarily by Section 404 of the Clean Water
Act, but other regulations could apply if, for example, a wetland
area provides important habitat for federally listed species and
species protected by the Migratory Bird Treaty Act and Bald and Golden
Eagle Protection Act. Section 404 requires that wetland impacts are
avoided, minimized, and mitigated to the greatest practicable extent
possible. Keystone has made route modifications to avoid wetland areas
(such as the NDEQ-identified Sand Hills Region) and has prepared a
CMRP that summarizes the proposed wetland avoidance, minimization,
and mitigation measures. In addition, various agencies, such as
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, could require additional mitigation
in accordance with American Indian tribal, local, state, and federal
permits and regulations.

**Table ES-3 Effects of Potential Releases on Aquifers**

**Aquifer Effects**

Alluvial Aquifers and Northern High Plains Aquifer (NHPAQ), including
the Ogallala Aquifer

Aquifer conditions in the NHPAQ in the proposed Project area indicate
that shallow groundwater generally discharges to local surface
waterbodies, and typically does not flow downward in significant
amounts or flow horizontally over long distances. Analysis of historic
spills and groundwater modeling indicate that contaminant plumes
from a large-scale release that reaches groundwater in the NHPAQ and
alluvial aquifers could be expected to affect groundwater quality up
to approximately 1,000 feet downgradient of the source. This localized
effect indicates that petroleum releases from the proposed Project
is unlikely to extensively affect water quality in this aquifer group.

Great Plains Aquifer (GPA)

Across most of the proposed pipeline area where the GPA is present,
it is very unlikely that any releases from the proposed pipeline
would affect groundwater quality in the aquifer because the aquifer
is typically deeply buried beneath younger, water-bearing sediments
and/or aquitard units. The exception is in southern Nebraska, where
the aquifer is closer to the surface. Water quality in the GPA could
be affected by releases in this area, but groundwater flow patterns
in the vicinity of the proposed Project route make such effects
unlikely. Overall, it is very unlikely that the proposed pipeline area
would affect water quality in the GPA due to weak downward gradients
(downward groundwater flows) in the aquifers overlying the GPA.

Northern Great Plains Aquifer System (NGPAS)

As with the GPA, petroleum releases from the proposed Project would
only affect water quality in portions of the NGPAS near the ground
surface. In the case of a large-scale release, these impacts would
typically be limited to within several hundred feet of the source,
and would not affect groundwater within areas that provide groundwater
recharge to large portions of the NGPAS.

Western Interior Plains Aquifer

The depth to this aquifer is several hundred feet below the ground
surface in the proposed Project area; therefore, there is an extremely
low probability that a petroleum release from the proposed Project
would affect water quality in this aquifer.

Shallow Groundwater and Water Wells

There are 2,537 wells within 1 mile of the proposed Project, including
39 public water supply wells and 20 private wells within 100 feet of
the pipeline ROW. The majority of these wells are in Nebraska. Those
wells that are in the vicinity of a petroleum release from the proposed
Project may be affected.

**ES.4.7 Threatened and Endangered**

**Species**

Consultation and coordination with the U.S. Fish and Wildlife
Service (USFWS) identified 14 federally protected, proposed, and
candidate species that could be affected by the proposed Project:
11 federally-listed threatened or endangered species, as defined
under the ESA, one proposed species for listing as endangered, and
two candidate species for listing as threatened or endangered. Of
the federally listed, proposed, and candidate species, the endangered
American buying beetle (*Nicrophorus americanus*) is the only species
that is likely to be adversely affected by the proposed Project (see
Figure ES-12). Other species could potentially be affected by the
proposed Project; among these are whooping cranes (*Grus americana*),
greater sage-grouse (*Centrocercus urophasianus*), and Western prairie
fringed orchids (*Platanthera praeclara*).

In consultation with the USFWS, the Department prepared a Biological
Assessment to evaluate the proposed Project's potential impacts
to federally listed and candidate species and designated critical
habitat. In addition, USFWS has developed a Biological Opinion
for the proposed Project, which includes recommended conservation
measures and compensatory mitigation for unavoidable impacts that
were assessed during the formal consultation process. The Biological
Opinion is attached in Appendix H, 2012 Biological Assessment, 2013
USFWS Biological Opinion, and Associated Documents.

**Figure ES-12 American Burying Beetle**

Approximately 83 miles of the proposed Project Route in South
Dakota and Nebraska would affect suitable American burying beetle
habitat. Consultation between the Department and USFWS resulted in
development of conservation measures and compensatory mitigation,
such as trapping and relocating beetles, special lighting restrictions
(the beetles are attracted to light), and establishment of a habitat
conservation trust.

Even with these measures, the proposed Project would be likely to
adversely affect the American burying beetle, resulting in incidental
take (such as unintended death or harm of individual beetles) during
construction or operation. The combination of Keystone's American
burying beetle monitoring program and Reclamation Performance Bond
would provide assurances that the acres disturbed by the proposed
Project would be restored appropriately. The USFWS concluded in the
2013 USFWS Biological Opinion that the proposed Project is not likely
to jeopardize the continued existence of the American burying beetle.

**ES.4.8 Geology and Soils**

The proposed route extends through relatively flat and stable areas,
and the potential for seismic hazards (earthquakes), landslides,
or subsidence (sink holes), is low. The pipeline would not cross any
known active faults. During construction, land clearing could increase
the risk of landslides and erosion. Keystone would, if permitted,
construct temporary erosion control systems and restore the ROW
after construction.

The proposed Project route would avoid the NDEQ- identified Sand
Hills Region, where soils are particularly susceptible to damage from
pipeline construction. Potential impacts to soils resources in other
areas associated with construction or operation of the proposed Project
and connected actions could include soil erosion, loss of topsoil,
soil compaction, an increase in the proportion of large rocks in
the topsoil, soil mixing, soil contamination, and related reductions
in the productivity of desirable vegetation or crops. Construction
also could result in damage to existing tile drainage systems (an
agriculture practice that removes excess water from soil subsurface),
irrigation systems, and shelterbelts.

To mitigate and minimize these impacts, Keystone would, if permitted,
put in place procedures for construction and operation that are
designed to reduce the likelihood and severity of proposed Project
impacts to soils and sediments, including topsoil segregation methods,
and to mitigate impacts to the extent practicable. After construction,
areas of erosion or settling would be monitored.

**ES.4.9 Terrestrial Vegetation**

Potential construction- and operations-related impacts to general
terrestrial vegetation resources associated with the proposed Project
include impacts to cultivated crops, developed land, grassland/pasture,
upland forest, open water, forested wetlands, emergent herbaceous
wetlands, and shrub-scrub communities. In addition, the proposed
Project route would result in impacts to biologically unique landscapes
and vegetation communities of conservation concern.

Keystone would, if permitted, restore topsoil, slopes, contours,
and drainage patterns to preconstruction conditions as practicable
and to reseed disturbed areas to restore vegetation cover, prevent
erosion, and control noxious weeds. Because disturbed prairie areas
are difficult to restore to existing (pre-disturbance) conditions,
Keystone would, if permitted, use specific best management practices
and procedures to minimize and mitigate the potential impacts to
native prairie areas and coordinate with appropriate agencies as
necessary to monitor progress.

**ES.4.10 Wildlife**

Potential impacts to wildlife associated with construction of
the proposed Project could include habitat loss, alteration, and
fragmentation; direct mortality during construction and operation
(e.g., vehicle collisions, power line/power pole collisions,
etc.); indirect mortality because of stress or avoidance of
feeding due to exposure to construction and operations noise,
low-level helicopter or airplane monitoring overflights, and from
increased human activity; reduced breeding success from exposure to
construction and operations noise and from increased human activity;
reduced survival or reproduction due to decreased availability of
edible plants, reduced cover, and increased exotics and invasives;
and increased predation (i.e., nest parasitism, creation of predator
travel corridors, and poaching).

To reduce potential construction- and operations-related effects where
habitat is crossed, Keystone would, if permitted, implement measures to
minimize adverse effects to wildlife habitats, including shelterbelts,
windbreaks, and living snow fences. Pipeline construction would be
conducted in accordance with required permits.

**ES.4.11 Fisheries**

The proposed route would cross rivers and streams, including perennial
streams that support recreational or commercial fisheries. Most
potential impacts to fisheries resources would occur during
construction and would be temporary or short term. Potential impacts
from construction of stream crossings include siltation, sedimentation,
bank erosion, sediment deposition, short-term delays in movements
of fish, and transport and spread of aquatic invasive animals and
plants. Keystone would, if permitted, minimize vehicle contact with
surface waters and clean equipment to prevent transportation of aquatic
invasive animals and plants. Impacts associated with potential releases
of oil are described in Section 4.13, Potential Releases.

Most streams would be crossed using one of several open-cut (trenching)
methods. Most stream crossings would be completed in less than 2
days, grading and disturbance to waterbody banks would be minimized,
and crossings would be timed to avoid sensitive spawning periods,
such that resulting steam bed disturbance and sediment impacts would
be temporary and minimized.

Most large rivers would be crossed using HDD methods, which would
install the pipeline well below the active river bed. As a result,
direct disturbance to the river bed, fish, aquatic animals and plants,
and river banks would be avoided. If permitted, Keystone has agreed
to develop site-specific contingency plans to address unintended
releases of drilling fluids that include preventative measures and
a spill response plan.

**ES.4.12 Land Use**

Construction of the proposed Project would disturb approximately
15,427 acres of land. Approximately 90 percent of that land is
privately owned while the remaining is owned by federal, state,
or local governments. Rangeland (approximately 9,695 acres) and
agriculture (approximately 4,975 acres) comprise the vast majority
of land use types that would be affected by construction.

After construction, approximately 5,569 acres would be retained within
permanent easements or acquired for operation of the proposed Project;
this includes the pipeline ROW and aboveground facilities. Nearly
all agricultural land and rangeland along the ROW would be allowed
to return to production with little impact on production levels in
the long term. However, there would be restrictions on growing woody
vegetation and installing structures within the 50-foot-wide permanent
ROW. Keystone has agreed to compensate landowners for crop losses on
a case-by-case basis.

Keystone would if permitted use construction measures designed to
reduce impacts to existing land uses such as topsoil protection,
avoiding interference with irrigation systems, repairing or restoring
drain tiles, assisting with livestock access and safety, and restoring
disturbed areas with custom native seed mixes.

**ES.4.13 Air Quality and Noise**

Dust and emissions from construction equipment would impact air
quality. Construction emissions typically would be localized,
intermittent, and temporary since proposed pipeline construction would
move through an area relatively quickly. Mitigation measures would
be employed and enforced by an environmental inspector assigned to
each construction spread.

All pump stations would be electrically powered by local utility
providers. As a result, during normal operation there would be
only minor emissions from valves and pumping equipment at the
pump stations. The proposed Project would not be expected to cause
or contribute to a violation of any federal, state, or local air
quality standards, and it would not require a Clean Air Act Title V
operating permit.

Construction activities would result in intermittent, temporary,
and localized increases in noise levels. To reduce construction noise
impacts, Keystone would, if permitted, limit the hours during which
activities with high-decibel noise levels are conducted in residential
areas, require noise mitigation procedures, monitor sound levels,
and develop site-specific mitigation plans to comply with regulations.

**ES.4.14 Cultural Resources**

The proposed Project route would cross various private, state, and
federal lands in Montana, South Dakota, and Nebraska where cultural
resources would be encountered. Literature searches were conducted to
locate previously identified cultural resources within the designated
area of potential effects. Field studies were conducted between 2008
and 2013 to identify cultural resources and assess archaeological
resources (i.e., sites), historic resources (i.e., buildings,
structures, objects, and districts), and properties of religious and
cultural significance, including traditional cultural properties.

As of December 2013, most of the proposed Project area has been
surveyed for cultural resources. The proposed Project area of potential
effects is approximately 39,500 acres, of which approximately
1,038 acres remain unsurveyed and are the subject of ongoing
field studies. As part of this Supplemental EIS route evaluation
process, consistent with the National Historic Preservation Act, the
Programmatic Agreement (PA) that was signed in 2011 has been amended,
finalized, and re-signed. Signatory parties to this agreement were
the Department, Advisory Council on Historic Preservation, Bureau
of Land Management, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, U.S. Bureau of
Reclamation, National Park Service, Western, Rural Utilities Service,
Natural Resources Conservation Service, Farm Service Agency, Bureau
of Indian Affairs, and the State Historic Preservation Offices of
Montana, South Dakota, Nebraska, and Kansas. Invited signatories
included the Montana Department of Natural Resources and Conservation,
Montana Department of Environmental Quality, and Keystone. Indian
tribes that participated in consultation were asked in 2013 to sign
as Concurring Parties, consistent with 36 Code of Federal Regulations
§§ 800.2(c)(2) and 800.6(c)(3).

Pursuant to the stipulations outlined in the PA, Keystone is required
to complete cultural resources surveys on all areas that would be
potentially impacted by the proposed Project, make recommendations on
National Register of Historic Places eligibility, provide information
on potential effects of the proposed Project, and provide adequate
mitigation in consultation with the Department, state and federal
agencies, and Indian tribes. Construction would not be allowed to
commence on any areas of the proposed Project until these stipulations
are met. The PA, therefore, would ensure that appropriate consultation
procedures are followed and that cultural resources surveys would be
completed prior to construction. If unanticipated cultural materials
or human remains were encountered during the construction phase of
the proposed Project, Keystone would implement Unanticipated Discovery
Plans pursuant to the PA.

**ES.4.14.1 Tribal Consultation**

Upon receiving a new application, the Department reached out directly
to 84 Indian tribes throughout the United States with potential
interest in the cultural resources potentially affected by the proposed
Project (see Figure ES-13). Of the 84 Indian tribes, 67 tribes notified
the Department that they would like to consult or were undecided as to
whether they would become consulting parties. All Indian tribes that
participated in consultation were asked in 2013 to sign the amended PA.

The Department has conducted a broad range of tribal consultations,
ranging from group meetings involving many Indian tribes and discussion
topics to individual discussions on specific topics via letter, phone,
and email. In addition to communication by phone, email, and letter,
high-level Department officials travelled to areas near the proposed
Project route to hold four face- to-face consultations, to which
all Indian tribes were invited and whose participation was funded
by Keystone, and one teleconference. Tribal meetings were held in
October 2012 (three meetings), May 2013 (one meeting), and July 2013
(teleconference). Face-to-face meetings were held in four locations:
Billings, Montana; Pierre, South Dakota; Rapid City, South Dakota;
and Lincoln, Nebraska.

The Department engaged in discussions with the tribes and Tribal
Historic Preservation Officers on issues relating to cultural
resources. Consultations included discussions of cultural resources,
in general, as well as cultural resources surveys, Traditional
Cultural Properties surveys, effects to cultural resources, and
mitigation. The Department has continued government- to-government
consultations to build on previous work, to ensure that tribal issues
of concern are addressed in the consultation process, and to amend
and incorporate comments and modifications to the PA, as appropriate,
in consultation with the tribes to conclude the Section 106 consistent
process for the proposed Project. Additionally, tribes were provided
proposed Project cultural resources survey reports and opportunities
to conduct Traditional Cultural Property surveys funded by Keystone.

**ES.4.15 Cumulative Effects**

The cumulative effects analysis evaluates the way that the proposed
Project's impacts interact with the impact of other past, present,
or reasonably foreseeable future actions or projects. The goal of the
cumulative impacts analysis is to identify situations where sets of
comparatively small individual impacts, taken together, constitute
a larger collective impact.

Cumulative impacts associated with the proposed Project and
connected actions vary among individual environmental resources and
locations. Generally, where long-term or permanent impacts from the
proposed Project are absent, the potential for additive cumulative
effects with other past, present, and reasonably foreseeable future
projects is negligible.

Keystone's CMRP and planned mitigation measures, individual federal
and state agency permitting conditions, and/or existing laws and
regulations would, if permitted, work to control potential impacts
and reduce the proposed Project's contribution to cumulative effects.

**Figure ES-13 Indian Tribes Consulted**

**ES.4.16 Environmental Impacts in Canada**

While the proposed Project analyzed in this Supplemental EIS begins
at the international boundary where the pipeline would exit at
Saskatchewan, Canada, and enter the United States through Montana,
the origination point of the pipeline system would be in Alberta,
Canada. In addition to the environmental analysis of the proposed
Project in the United States, the Department monitored and obtained
information from the environmental analysis of the Canadian portion
of the proposed Project. The Canadian government, not the Department,
conducted an environmental review of the portion of the proposed
Project within Canada. However, the Department has included information
from the Canadian government's assessment in this Supplemental EIS
and has continued to monitor information from Canada as it becomes
available.

On March 11, 2010, the Canadian National Energy Board issued its
168-page Reasons for Decision granting Keystone's application to build
the Canadian portion of the proposed Project. This document provided
a rationale for the approval of the pipeline by Canadian regulatory
authorities and a description of the National Energy Board's analysis
of the following topics: economic feasibility, commercial impacts,
tolls and tariffs, engineering, land matters, public consultation,
aboriginal consultation, and environmental and socioeconomic matters.

Moreover, analysis and mitigation of environmental impacts in Canada
more generally are ongoing by Canadian officials. For example,
on September 1, 2012, the Government of Alberta's development plan
for the Lower Athabascan oil sands region became effective. The
plan requires cancellation of about 10 oil sands leases, sets aside
nearly 20,000 square kilometers (7,700 square miles) for conservation,
and sets new environmental standards for the region in an effort to
protect sensitive habitat, wildlife, and forest land.

**ES.5.0 ALTERNATIVES**

Detailed analysis was conducted on three broad categories of
alternatives to the proposed Project, consistent with NEPA:

• No Action Alternative---which addresses potential market responses
that could result if the Presidential Permit is denied or the proposed
Project is not otherwise implemented;

• Major Route Alternatives---which includes other potential pipeline
routes for transporting WCSB and Bakken crude oil to Steele City,
Nebraska; and

• Other Alternatives---which include minor route variations,
alternative pipeline designs, and alternative sites for aboveground
facilities.

Several alternatives exist for the transport of WCSB and Bakken
crude oil to Gulf Coast refineries, including many that were
not carried forward for detailed analysis. This Supplemental EIS
provides a detailed description of the categories of alternatives,
the alternative screening process, and the detailed alternatives
identified for further evaluation.

**ES.5.1 No Action Alternative**

The No Action Alternative analysis considers what would likely
happen if the Presidential Permit is denied or the proposed Project
is not otherwise implemented. It includes the Status Quo Baseline,
which serves as a benchmark against which other alternatives are
evaluated. Under the Status Quo Baseline, the proposed Project
would not be constructed and the resulting direct, indirect, and
cumulative impacts that are described in this Supplemental EIS would
not occur. The Status Quo Baseline is a snapshot of the crude oil
production and delivery systems at current levels -- in other words,
no change at all -- irrespective of likely alternative transport
scenarios to transport WCSB and Bakken crude.

The No Action Alternative includes analysis of three alternative
transport scenarios that, based on the findings of the market analysis,
are believed to meet the proposed Project's purpose (i.e., providing
WCSB and Bakken crude oil to meet refinery demand in the Gulf Coast
area) if the Presidential Permit for the proposed Project were
denied, or if the pipeline were otherwise not constructed. Under
the alternative transport scenarios, other environmental impacts
would occur in lieu of the proposed Project. This Supplemental EIS
includes analysis of various combinations of transportation modes
for oil, including truck, barge, tanker, and rail. These scenarios
are considered representative of the crude oil transport alternatives
with which the market would respond in absence of the

Keystone XL pipeline. These three alternative transport scenarios
(i.e., the Rail and Pipeline Scenario, Rail and Tanker Scenario,
and Rail Direct to the Gulf Coast Scenario) are described below and
illustrated on Figure ES-14.

**ES.5.1.1 Rail and Pipeline Scenario**

Under this scenario, WCSB and Bakken crude oil (in the form of dilbit
or synbit) would be shipped via rail from Lloydminster, Saskatchewan
(the nearest rail terminal served by two Class I rail companies),
to Stroud, Oklahoma, where it would be temporarily stored and then
transported via existing and expanded pipelines approximately 17
miles to Cushing, Oklahoma, where the crude oil would interconnect
with the interstate oil pipeline system.

This scenario would require the construction of two new or expanded
rail loading terminals in Lloydminster, Saskatchewan (the possible
loading point for WCSB crude oil), one new terminal in Epping, North
Dakota (the representative loading point for Bakken crude oil),
seven new terminals in Stroud, and up to 14 unit trains (consisting
of approximately 100 cars carrying the same material and destined
for the same delivery location) per day (12 from Lloydminster and
two from Epping) to transport the equivalent volume of crude oil as
would be transported by the proposed Project.

**ES.5.1.2 Rail and Tanker Scenario**

The second transportation scenario assumes crude oil (as dilbit or
synbit) would be transported by rail from Lloydminster to a western
Canada port (assumed to be Prince Rupert, British Columbia), where it
would be loaded onto Suezmax tankers (capable of carrying approximately
986,000 barrels of WCSB crude oil) for transport to the U.S. Gulf Coast
(Houston and/or Port Arthur) via the Panama Canal. Bakken crude would
be shipped from Epping to Stroud via BNSF Railway or Union Pacific
rail lines, similar to the method described under the Rail and
Pipeline Scenario. This scenario would require up to 12 unit trains
per day between Lloydminster and Prince Rupert, and up to two unit
trains per day between Epping and Stroud. This scenario would require
the construction of two new or expanded rail loading facilities in
Lloydminster with other existing terminals in the area handling the
majority of the WCSB for shipping to Prince Rupert. Facilities in
Prince Rupert would include a new rail unloading and storage facility
and a new marine terminal encompassing approximately 4,200 acres and
capable of accommodating two Suezmax tankers. For the Bakken crude
portion of this Scenario, one new rail terminal would be necessary
in both Epping, North Dakota, and Stroud, Nebraska.

**Figure ES-14 Representative No Action Alternative Scenarios**

**ES.5.1.3 Rail Direct to the Gulf Coast**

**Scenario**

The third transportation scenario assumes that WCSB and Bakken
crude oil (as dilbit) would be shipped by rail from Lloydminster,
Saskatchewan, and Epping, North Dakota, directly to existing rail
facilities in the Gulf Coast region capable of off-loading up to
14 unit trains per day. These existing facilities would then either
ship the crude oil by pipeline or barge the short distance to nearby
refineries. It would largely rely on existing rail terminals in
Lloydminster, but would likely require construction of up to two new
or expanded terminals to accommodate the additional WCSB shipments out
of Canada. One new rail loading terminal would be needed in Epping
to ship Bakken crude oil. Sufficient off-loading rail facilities
currently exist or are proposed in the Gulf Coast area such that no
new terminals would need to be built under this scenario.

**ES.5.2 Major Pipeline Route Alternatives**

The Department considered potential alternative pipeline routes
to assess whether or not route alternatives could avoid or reduce
impacts to environmentally sensitive resources while also meeting the
proposed Project's purpose. Consistent with NEPA, a two-phase screening
process was used to evaluate prospective alternatives using a set of
criteria to determine their technical, environmental, and economic
viability. Alternatives that failed to meet the screening criteria
were not brought forward for detailed analysis in this Supplemental
EIS. The initial (Phase I) screening of other major route alternatives
considered the following criteria:

• Meeting the proposed Project's purpose and need, including whether
the alternative would require additional infrastructure such as a
pipeline to access Bakken crude oil;

• Availability;

• Reliability;

• Length within the United States;

• Total length of the pipeline, including both the United States
and Canada;

• Estimated number of aboveground facilities;

• Length co-located within an existing corridor;

• Acres of land directly affected during construction; and

• Acres of land directly affected permanently.

Pipeline length was used as an important screening criterion because
it has a relatively direct relationship with:

• System reliability, in that the longer the pipeline the greater
risk that some portion may become inoperable at some point, thereby
delaying shipments.

• Environmental impacts, including:

− Risk of spills and leaks, which represent the greatest potential
threat to water and aquatic resources;

− Temporary construction-related disturbance to natural habitat
(e.g., wetlands, forests, native prairie); and

− Permanent habitat fragmentation.

• Construction and operational costs, which generally increase in
proportion to overall pipeline length.

All other factors being equal, longer pipelines are less desirable
because they represent greater risks to system reliability,
environmental impacts, and project costs.

As a result of this Phase I screening process, the following
alternatives were eliminated because they would not meet the project
purpose and/or were significantly longer than other viable options
(see Figure ES-15):

• Western Alternative (to Cushing);

• Express Platte Alternative; and

• Existing Keystone Corridor

− Option 1: Proposed Border Crossing (near Morgan, Montana)

− Option 2: Existing Keystone Pipeline Border Crossing (at Pembina,
North Dakota).

Several commenters recommended that the proposed Project parallel
the existing Keystone Pipeline rather than the proposed route. The
Department considered these comments, but ultimately concluded that
the existing Keystone Pipeline Route was not a reasonable alternative
because it would not meet the proposed Project's purpose and need
(i.e., would not meet Keystone's contractual obligations to transport
100,000 bpd of Bakken crude oil). Further, the existing Keystone
Pipeline Corridor would be longer (taking into consideration pipeline
length in both Canada and the United States), which represents an
increased spill risk. The 2011 Steele City Segment, the I-90 Corridor,
and the Steele City Segment A1A alternatives, however, were retained
for further screening.

The Phase II screening used a desktop data review of key environmental
and other features (e.g., wetlands and waterbodies crossed, total
acreage affected). After this Phase II screening, the Steele City
Segment A1A Alternative was eliminated because this route would
be longer with an associated increased risk for spills and leaks,
would cross more miles of principal aquifer and wetlands, and would
require a second major crossing of the Missouri River, relative to the
proposed Project. For these reasons, the Steele City A1A Alternative
would not offer any offsetting environmental advantages relative
to the proposed Project to warrant further consideration. However,
both the 2011 Steele City Segment and I-90 Corridor alternatives
were considered reasonable alternatives and were retained for full
evaluation in this Supplemental EIS. These two route alternatives are
described below and depicted in Figure ES-15. Table ES-4 summarizes
key aspects of the major pipeline route alternatives.

**Table ES-4 Summary of Major Pipeline Route Alternatives**

**Proposed**

**Project**

**2011 Steele City**

**Segment Alternative**

**I-90 Corridor**

**Alternative**

New Pipeline Length (miles) 875 854 927

Number of Aboveground Facilitiesa 73 71 77

Length Co-Located with Existing Keystone Pipeline (miles) 0 0 254

NDEQ-Identified Sand Hills Region Crossed (miles) 0 89 0

Highly Erodible Soil (Wind) Crossed (miles) 73 116 36

Perennial Waterbody Crossings 56 53 61

Wetlands Affected during Construction (acres) 262 544 223

Average Annual Employment During Construction 3,900 3,900 4,100

Property Tax Revenues (millions) $55.6 $53.7 $59.3

Construction Land Area Affected (acres) 11,593 11,387 12,360

Operations (Permanent) Land Area Required (acres) 5,569 5,176 4,818

a Does not include 2 pump stations for the Cushing Extension in Kansas

**Figure ES-15 Preliminary Pipeline Route Alternatives**

**ES.5.2.1 Keystone XL 2011 Steele City**

**Segment Alternative**

The Keystone XL 2011 Steele City Segment Alternative evaluates the
impacts of constructing the route proposed in the 2011 Final EIS as
a comparison against which other route alternatives, including the
proposed Project, can be made. This alternative would follow Keystone's
proposed Project route from the Canadian border, designated Milepost
(MP) 0, south to approximately MP 204, where it would connect with the
Bakken Marketlink Project onramp at the same location as the proposed
Project and continue to approximately MP 615 in northern Nebraska near
the South Dakota state line. At that location, the Keystone XL 2011
Steele City Segment Alternative would divert from the current proposed
Project and would continue southeasterly for another 240 miles to the
southern terminus at Steele City, Nebraska. For approximately 89 miles,
the Keystone XL 2011 Steele City Segment Alternative would cross the
NDEQ-identified Sand Hills Region.

**ES.5.2.2 I-90 Corridor Alternative**

Keystone's proposed Project route starts at the Canadian Border
(MP 0) and stretches south through Montana and into South Dakota to
approximately MP 516, where the proposed pipeline route intersects
Interstate 90 (I-90). From this point, this alternative pipeline
route would diverge from the proposed Project route, following the
ROW of I-90 and State Highway 262 for 157 miles, where it would then
intersect and follow the ROW of the existing Keystone pipeline to
Steele City, Nebraska.

The I-90 Corridor would avoid crossing the NDEQ- identified Sand
Hills Region, and would reduce the length of pipeline crossing the
NHPAQ system, which includes the Ogallala Aquifer.

**ES.5.3 Other Alternatives Considered**

In addition to the major route alternatives, the Department reviewed
proposed variations---relatively short deviations---to the proposed
route that were designed to avoid or minimize construction impacts
to specific resources (e.g., cultural resource sites, wetlands,
recreational lands, residences) or that minimize constructability
issues (e.g., shallow bedrock, difficult waterbody crossings,
steep terrain).

The Department also considered two alternative pipeline designs in
response to public comments: an aboveground pipeline and an alternative
using a smaller-diameter pipe. The Department determined that both
alternative designs were not reasonable alternatives for the proposed
Project because they would not meet the proposed Project purpose
and need and/or because of safety and security reasons; therefore,
they were not considered further in this Supplemental EIS.

This Supplemental EIS considered renewable energy sources and energy
conservation as alternatives to the proposed Project. As noted in
Section 1.4, Market Analysis, the crude oil would be used largely for
transportation fuels and, therefore, any alternatives to the crude
oil would need to fulfill the same purpose. The analysis found that
even with renewable energy and conservation, there would still be
a demand for oil sands-derived crude oil. Based on this evaluation,
these alternatives were not carried forward for further analysis as
alternatives to the proposed Project.

**ES.5.4 Comparison of Alternatives**

Consistent with NEPA and the CEQ regulations, the Department compared
the proposed Project with the alternatives that met the proposed
Project's purpose and need, and that were carried forward for detailed
analysis in this Supplemental EIS. The alternatives carried forward
for detailed analysis were: the 2011 Steele City Segment Alternative,
the I-90 Corridor Alternative, and the three identified No Action
Alternative scenarios (i.e., the Rail and Pipeline Scenario, the Rail
and Tanker Scenario, and the Rail Direct to the Gulf Coast Scenario).

The two pipeline alternatives compare different routes that meet
the purpose and need of the proposed Project, and the No Action
Alternative scenarios describe the likely potential impacts associated
with transport of crude oil from the WCSB and the Bakken formations if
the Presidential Permit is denied or if the proposed Project is not
otherwise implemented. The comparison focuses on three categories of
impacts: physical disturbance, GHG emissions, and potential releases.

**ES.5.4.1 Physical Disturbance Impacts**

**Alternatives Comparison**

The primary differences between the proposed Project and the
alternatives related to physical disturbance are summarized in
Table ES-5.

**Table ES-5 Physical Disturbance Impacts Associated with New
Construction and Operations for the Proposed Project and Alternatives**

**Status Quo**

**Baseline**

**Proposed**

**Project**

**2011 Steele City**

**Segment**

**Alternative**

**Corridor**

**Alternative**

**No Action**

**Rail/Pipeline**

**Scenario**

**No Action**

**Rail/Tanker**

**Scenario**

**No Action**

**Rail Direct**

**to the Gulf**

**Scenario**

New Pipeline Length (miles) 0 875 854 927 17 32 0

Number of New Aboveground Facilities 0 73 71 77 33 33 19

Length Co-located with Existing Keystone Pipeline (miles) 0 0 0 254
NA NA NA

NDEQ-Identified Sand Hills Region Crossed (miles) 0 0 89 0 0 0 0

New Highly Erodible Soil (Wind) Crossed (miles) 0 73 116 36 0 0 0

Perennial Waterbody Crossings 0 56 53 61 1,216 330 711

Major Water Crossingsa 0 62 60 61 42 14 40

Number of Shallow Wells in Proximity b 0 113 97 42 NA NA NA

New NHPAQ Crossed (miles) 0 294 247 145 NA NA NA

Wetland Affected during Construction (acres) 0 262 544 223 193 351 NQc

Communities within 2 Miles 0 17 16 37 350 182 669

Construction (Temporary) Land Area Affected (acres) 0 11,599 11,387
12,360 5,227 6,427 1,500

Operations (Permanent) Land Area Required (acres) 0 5,309 5,176 4,818
5,103 6,303 1,500

Notes: This table does not include Canadian impacts for pipeline
alternatives. NA = not applicable NQ = not quantified; insufficient
design data NDEQ = Nebraska Department of Environmental Quality
NHPAQ = Northern High Plains Aquifer a This is defined as channel
crossings of waterbodies that delineate U.S. Geological Survey National
Hydrography Dataset Level 4 (HUC4) Hydrologic Unit watershed basins. b
A shallow well is defined as a well with a depth of 50 feet or less,
but does not include wells with zero depth; proximity is defined as
within ¼ mile of the centerline. c Specific facility footprints for
this scenario are not known at this time. However, impacts would be
generally similar to the other rail scenarios.

**ES.5.4.2 Greenhouse Gas Emissions**

**Alternatives Comparison**

To facilitate comparison of GHG emissions across all alternatives
for operational GHG emissions, an assessment was made for all
alternatives along the entire route from Hardisty, Alberta, to the
Gulf Coast (including pipelines in Canada and from Steele City to the
Gulf Coast). GHG emissions from the two pipeline route alternatives
would be similar in scale to those of the proposed Project. The
direct emissions during the operation phase of the 2011 Steele City
Segment Alternative would be essentially the same as those generated
by the proposed Project because they would have the same number of
pump stations (20). The I-90 Corridor Alternative is expected to have
similar but slightly higher GHG emissions because it would have one
more pump station than the proposed Project and could generate slightly
higher amounts of indirect GHG emissions from electricity consumption.

During operation of all No Action rail scenarios, the increased number
of unit trains along the scenario routes would result in GHG emissions
from both diesel fuel combustion and electricity generation to support
rail terminal operations (as well as for pump station operations for
the Rail/Pipeline Scenario). The total annual GHG emissions (direct
and indirect) attributed to the No Action scenarios range from 28 to
42 percent greater than for the proposed Project (see Table ES-6).

The indirect GHG emissions over the lifecycle of oil sands crude oil
production, transportation, refining, and product use are compared
between the proposed Project and the evaluated alternatives in Section
ES.4.1.2, Lifecycle Analysis.

**Table ES-6 Annual Greenhouse Gas Emissions from Crude Transport
(from Hardisty/Lloydminster,**

**Alberta, to the Gulf Coast Area) Associated with the Proposed
Project and Alternatives**

**(per 100,000 bpd)**

**Overall**

**Proposed**

**Project**

**Route a**

**Overall 2011**

**Steele City**

**Segment**

**Alternative**

**Route b**

**Overall I-90**

**Corridor**

**Alternative Route c**

**No Action**

**Rail/Pipeline**

**Scenario**

**No Action**

**Rail/Tanker**

**Scenario**

**Direct to**

**the Gulf**

**Scenario**

**Operation (direct and indirect)---Transportation, Not Extraction**

MTCO2e/Year per 830,000 bpd 3,123,859 3,123,844 3,211,946 4,428,902
4,364,611 3,991,472

MTCO2e/Year per 100,000 bpd 376,369 376,367 386,981 533,603 525,857
480,900

% Difference from Proposed Project NA 0.0% 2.8% 41.8% 39.7% 27.8%

a Canadian, Proposed Project, and Gulf Coast b Canadian, Steele City
Segment, and Gulf Coast c Canadian, I-90, and Gulf Coast Notes: The
emissions shown for the overall proposed Project differ from those
shown for the proposed Project in Section ES.4.1.1, Greenhouse
Gas Emissions from the Proposed Project, in order to present a
full comparison of the overall proposed Project route to the other
alternatives. All data include train emissions for return trips as
well. MTCO2e = metric tons of CO2 equivalents NA = not applicable bpd =
barrels per day

**ES.5.4.3 Potential Spill Risk Alternatives**

**Comparison**

Similar to the GHG emissions comparison, potential spill risk was
evaluated for alternatives along the entire route from Hardisty,
Alberta, to the Gulf Coast (including portions of the route in
Canada and including existing pipelines from Steele City to the
Gulf Coast). Table ES-7 provides a summary of calculated potential
release impacts for the various alternatives analyzed in terms of
the number of potential releases per year and the potential volume
of oil released per year.

Both of the major route alternatives would begin at the same border
crossing as the proposed Project (near Morgan, Montana) and end at the
same location as the proposed Project (near Steele City, Nebraska);
as such, the pipelines in Canada north of the border crossing and
the pipelines south of Steele City down to the Gulf Coast would
be identical for all three overall pipeline routes. Compared to the
proposed Project, the two major pipeline route alternatives would have
similar potential spill risks (see Table ES-7). In addition, both of
these major route alternatives would require aboveground facilities
that are similar to those for the proposed Project; therefore,
potential releases impact areas would be similar. Because the I-90
Corridor Alternative is slightly longer than the proposed Project,
it would carry a slightly higher spill risk (with an estimated 533
bbl released per year compared to 518 annual bbl released for the
proposed Project).

The three No Action Alternative scenarios differ from the proposed
Project in that they would use alternative modes of transportation
to deliver crude oil to refinery markets in the Gulf Coast rather
than just a pipeline (although one of the three scenarios includes a
pipeline as a significant part of its delivery system). Potential spill
risks for these alternative modes differ from the proposed Project
in terms of both average spill frequency and average spill size.

Volume of crude oil transportation by rail in the No Action Alternative
scenarios would generally be limited to the volume contained within
individual railcars. This volume constrains the total volume of crude
oil that could potentially impact groundwater relative to the proposed
Project in the event of a release. This constraint is offset by the
increased statistical likelihood of spills associated with these
alternative modes of crude oil transport relative to pipelines.

Historical rail incident data were analyzed to evaluate potential
releases associated with rail transport in the United States. The
results help provide insight into what could potentially occur with
respect to spill volume, incident cause, and incident frequency for
the No Action Alternative scenarios that involve rail transport. In
addition, rail incident frequencies were compared to frequencies for
other modes of transport (i.e., pipeline, marine tanker). Although
the product to be transported by the proposed Project is crude oil,
incidents for petroleum products were also analyzed to provide a
comparison to a larger dataset. In order to make comparisons between
the modes of transportation, the statistics regarding releases are
expressed in terms of *ton-miles* (1 ton-mile is transporting 1 ton
of product 1 mile; to calculate total ton-miles in a given year,
one multiplies the total tons transported by the total number of
miles transported).

The rates of releases and average size of releases vary between modes
of transportation. For instance, rail transport has more reported
releases of crude oil per ton-mile than pipeline or marine transport
but, overall, pipeline transport has the highest number of barrels
released per ton-mile. Comprehensive data from 2010 to 2013 are not
yet available and therefore this analysis does not include incidents
subsequent to 2009 such as the 2013 Lac-Mégantic rail tragedy or the
Tesoro Logistics pipeline incident. The number of barrels released per
year for the No Action scenarios is higher than what is projected for
the proposed Project or the other pipeline alternatives (as detailed
in Table ES-7) because of the alternate modes of transport in the No
Action scenarios.

There is also a greater potential for injuries and fatalities
associated with rail transport relative to pipelines. Adding 830,000
bpd to the yearly transport mode volume would result in an estimated
49 additional injuries and six additional fatalities for the No Action
rail scenarios compared to one additional injury and no fatalities
for the proposed Project on an annual basis.

**Table ES-7 Potential Releases Impacts (Full Pathway) Associated
with the Proposed Project and Alternatives**

**Overall**

**Proposed Project**

**Route a**

**Overall 2011**

**Steele City**

**Segment**

**Alternative**

**Route b**

**Overall I-90**

**Corridor**

**Alternative**

**Route c**

**No Action**

**Rail/Pipeline**

**Scenario**

**No Action**

**Rail/Tanker**

**Scenario**

**No Action Rail Direct**

**to the Gulf Coast**

**Scenario**

**Option 1**g **Option 2**g

Miles for Transport (Overall Route) 1,938 1,917 1,990 3,902 14,014
4,624 5,375

Releases per Yeard,e 0.46 0.46 0.48 294 276 383 455

Barrels Released per Year f 518 513 533 1,227 4,633 1,335 1,606

a Canadian, Proposed Project, and Gulf Coast b Canadian, Steele
City Segment, and Gulf Coast c Canadian, I-90, and Gulf Coast d
Releases per year frequency was calculated using databases from the
U.S. Department of Transportation covering U.S. transportation in
the years 2002 to 2009. The pipeline spill frequency was based on a
16-inch diameter crude oil pipeline. e Releases per Year = (16-inch
U.S. crude pipeline spill frequency * total pipeline ton-miles) +
(U.S. rail spill frequency * total rail ton-miles) + (U.S. marine
spill frequency * total rail ton-miles) + (U.S. truck spill frequency *
total truck ton-miles). f Barrels Released per Year = (average 16-inch
U.S. crude pipeline barrels (bbl) released * total pipeline ton-miles)
+ (average rail bbl released * total rail ton-miles) + (average marine
bbl) released * total rail ton-miles) + (average truck bbl released *
total truck ton-miles). g The Option 1 route goes through Lloydminster
while Option 2 routes through Fort McMurray.
