**ES.5.5 Greenhouse Gas Emissions and Climate Change**

The draft Supplemental EIS evaluates the GHG emissions associated
with the proposed Project from several distinct perspectives. The
construction and operation of the proposed Project and its connected
actions (the pipeline, pump stations, electrical transmission lines,
etc.) would generate GHG emissions. In addition, concerns have been
raised that extracting the crude oil that would be transported by
the proposed Project produces more GHG emissions compared to other
types of crude oil. Finally, climate change considerations---which
are influenced by GHG emissions---could affect the construction and
operation of the proposed Project. GHG and climate change issues
were the subject of many comments received during the public scoping
process for the proposed Project.

*ES.5.5.1 Greenhouse Gas Emissions*

Construction and operation of the proposed Project would generate
GHG emissions from several sources or activities, as described below.

*Construction-Phase Sources*

• Clearing of land in the proposed ROW via open burning;

• Electricity usage and emergency generators at construction
camps; and

• Construction vehicles, worker transports, and other mobile sources.

*Operations-Phase Sources*

• Fugitive methane emissions at connections;

• Maintenance vehicles (two or more times per year);

• Aircraft used for aerial inspection (biweekly); and

• Electrical generation for pump station power. During the
construction period, GHG emissions from these sources and activities
would be approximately 240,423 metric tons of carbon dioxide
equivalents (CO2e). Emissions during operation of the proposed Project
would be approximately 3.19 million metric tons of CO2e per year,
almost entirely due to electrical generation needed to power the
proposed Project's pump stations.

The annual CO2e emissions from the proposed Project is equivalent to
CO2e emissions from approximately 626,000 passenger vehicles operating
for one year or 398,000 homes using electricity for one year.

*ES.5.5.2 Life Cycle Analysis*

Combustion of fossil fuels, including petroleum- based products
such as crude oil, is a major source of global GHG emissions, which
contribute to human- induced climate change. WCSB crudes are more
GHG-intensive than the other heavy crudes they would replace or
displace in U.S. refineries, and emit an estimated 17 percent more
GHGs on a life-cycle basis than the average barrel of crude oil
refined in the United States in 2005. If the proposed Project were
to induce growth in the rate of extraction in the oil sands, then it
could cause GHG emissions greater than just its direct emissions.

Based on information and analysis about the North American crude
transport infrastructure (particularly the proven ability of rail
to transport substantial quantities of crude oil profitably under
current market conditions, and to add capacity relatively rapidly)
and the global crude oil market, the draft Supplemental EIS concludes
that approval or denial of the proposed

Project is unlikely to have a substantial impact on the rate of
development in the oil sands, or on the amount of heavy crude oil
refined in the Gulf Coast area.

As discussed in the market analysis, if the proposed Project were
denied but other proposed new and expanded pipelines go forward,
production could decrease by approximately 0.4 to 0.6 percent of total
WCSB production by 2030. If all pipeline capacity were restricted,
oil sands production could decrease by approximately 2 to 4 percent
by 2030.

The incremental indirect life-cycle emissions associated with those
decreases in oil sands production are estimated to be in the range of
0.07 to 0.83 million metric tons CO2 equivalent (MMTCO2e) annually
if the proposed Project were not built, and in the range of 0.35 to
5.3 MMTCO2e annually if all pipeline projects were denied.

As WCSB and Bakken crudes replace crudes from other
sources---independent of whether the proposed Project exists---the
life-cycle GHG emissions associated with transportation fuels produced
in U.S. refineries would likely increase. The GHG intensity of
reference crudes may also increase in the future as more of the world
crude supply requires extraction by increasingly energy-intensive
techniques, such as those used to extract oil-sands crude, although
regulatory pressures and technological advances could counter this
trend.

*ES.5.5.3 Climate Change Effects on the Project*

Changes in climate have been observed both globally and within
the proposed Project study area over the past century. These
changes include direct effects, such as increases and decreases
in temperature and precipitation, and indirect effects, such as
increases in freeze-thaw cycles, increased occurrences of flooding
and drought, and wind erosion of soil, and resultant changes to the
natural environment, such as vegetation changes.

As part of the preparation of this draft Supplemental EIS, an analysis
was performed to evaluate the potential impacts of climate change
on the proposed Project construction and operations. Using future
climate scenarios developed by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change and peer-reviewed downscaled models, the draft Supplemental
EIS evaluates the range of impacts that climate change could have on
the proposed Project.

Assuming construction of the proposed Project begins as planned in
2015, climate conditions during the 1- to 2-year construction period
would not differ substantially from current conditions. During the
operations period, climate change projections suggest the following
changes:

• Warmer winter temperatures;

• A shorter cool season;

• A longer duration of frost-free periods;

• More freeze-thaw cycles per year (which could lead to an increased
number of episodes of soil contraction and expansion);

• Warmer summer temperatures;

• Increased number of hot days and consecutive hot days; and

• Longer summers (which could lead to impacts associated with heat
stress and wildfire risks).

The pipeline would be buried deep enough to avoid surface impacts of
climate changes (freeze-thaw cycles, fires, and temperature extremes).
