
**ES.6.10 Socioeconomics**

Several types of socioeconomic effects could occur within the
region of influence. Temporary effects during construction of the
proposed Project could include changes in population levels or local
demographics, changes in the demand for housing and public services,
disruption of local transportation corridors, increased employment
opportunities and related labor income benefits, and increased
government revenues associated with sales and payroll taxes. Isolated
impacts on individual property owners and economic land use also could
occur along the pipeline route. The primary socioeconomic impacts
associated with long-term operation of the proposed Project likely
would include employment and income benefits resulting from long-term
staffing requirements and local operating expenditures, as well as an
increased property tax base and associated tax revenues. Long-term
impacts could include impacts to property owners if there is any
decrease in land value or usefulness as a result of the pipeline.

However, tilled agricultural land in most cases would still be useable
after construction.

The proposed pipeline has the potential to generate substantial direct
and indirect economic benefits for local and regional economies along
the pipeline route. During construction, these benefits would be
derived from the construction labor requirements of the Project and
spending on construction goods and services that would not otherwise
have occurred if the line were not built. At the local level, these
benefits would be in the form of employment of local labor as part
of the construction workforce and related income benefits from wage
earnings, construction expenditures made at local businesses, and
construction worker spending in the local economy.

A peak workforce of approximately 5,000 to 6,000 personnel would be
required to construct the entire

Project and it is estimated that 4,500 to 5,100 non-local
residents would temporarily move into the region of influence,
resulting in short-term population increases during the construction
period. Keystone is expected to utilize temporary local construction
labor where possible and it is estimated that approximately 10 to
15 percent (50 to 100 people per spread) could be hired from the
local work force for each spread, although this may not be possible
in rural areas. Non-local construction workers moving into the
region of influence would require short-term accommodations such as
hotels/motels, recreational vehicle sites, campgrounds and temporary
work camps (four camps are anticipated, two in Montana and two in
South Dakota).

Portions of the new pipeline and new and upgraded pumping stations
are located in areas with minority populations and with families
living below the poverty level; however, none over 50 percent. The
Project also is located in areas of majority populations and
with relatively few families living below the poverty level. The
Project is not expected to result in adverse impacts that would fall
disproportionately on minority or low-income populations located
along the pipeline route. Public participation in assessing the

Project is especially important in areas where low-income populations
and/or minority populations have the potential to be affected. Public
outreach would continue throughout the life of the Project.