*ES.5.4.2 Socioeconomics*

*Construction*

Construction of the proposed Project would generate temporary,
positive socioeconomic impacts as a result of local employment, taxes,
spending by construction workers, and spending on construction goods
and services. Including direct, indirect, and induced effects, the
proposed Project would potentially support approximately 42,100 average

annual jobs across the United States over a 1- to 2- year construction
period (of which, approximately 3,900 would be directly employed in
construction activities). This employment would potentially translate
to approximately $2.05 billion in earnings. Direct expenditures such
as construction and materials costs (including construction camps)
would total approximately $3.3 billion. Short-term revenues from
sources such as sales and use taxes would total approximately $65
million in states that levy such a tax. Yields from fuel and other
taxes could not be calculated, but would provide some additional
economic benefit to host counties and states.

The proposed Project area does not have sufficient temporary housing
for the anticipated construction workforce. Keystone proposes to meet
the housing need through a combination of local housing and eight
construction camps. Property taxes on these camps would potentially
generate the equivalent of one full year of property tax revenue for
seven host counties, totaling approximately $2 million.

Other construction-phase socioeconomic impacts would include minor
increases in demand for utilities and public services (such as
police, fire, and emergency medical services), and temporary traffic
delays at public road crossings. The construction camps would provide
utilities and other services for workers, reducing demands on existing
communities.

*Operations Phase*

Generally, the largest economic impacts of pipelines occur during
construction rather than operations. Once in place, the labor
requirements for pipeline operations are relatively minor. Operation of
the proposed Project would generate 35 permanent and 15 temporary jobs,
primarily for routine inspections, maintenance, and repairs. Based
on this estimate, routine operation of the proposed Pipeline would
have negligible socioeconomic impacts.
