
**PURPOSE OF AND NEED FOR THE KEYSTONE XL PROJECT**

The primary purpose of the proposed Project is to provide the
infrastructure necessary to transport Western Canadian Sedimentary
Basin heavy crude oil from the U.S. border with Canada to delivery
points in Texas in response to the market demand of Gulf Coast
refineries for heavy crude oil. This market demand is driven by the
need of the refiners to replace declining feed stocks of heavy crude
oil obtained from other foreign sources with crude oil from a more
stable and reliable source. Keystone currently has firm, long-term
contracts to transport 380,000 bpd of Canadian crude oil to the Texas
delivery points.

An additional purpose of the proposed Project is to transport Canadian
heavy crude oil to the proposed Cushing tank farm in response to the
market demand of refineries in the central and Midwest U.S. for heavy
crude oil. Keystone also has firm contracts to transport 155,000 bpd
of Canadian crude oil to

Cushing, Oklahoma in the existing Keystone Oil Pipeline Project. If
the proposed Project is approved and implemented, Keystone would
transfer shipment of crude oil under those contracts to the proposed
Project. Although there is sufficient pipeline capacity from Canada
to the U.S. in general to accommodate projected additional imports
of Canadian crude in the short to medium term, there is extremely
limited pipeline transport capacity to move such crude oils to Gulf
Coast refineries.

The 58 refineries in the Gulf Coast District provide a total
refining capacity of approximately 8.4 million bpd, or nearly half of
U.S. refining capacity. These refineries provide substantial volumes of
refined petroleum product, such as gasoline and jet fuel, via pipeline
to the Gulf Coast region as well as the East Coast and the Midwest.

In 2009, Gulf Coast refineries imported approximately 5.1 million bpd
of crude oil from more than 40 countries. The top four suppliers were
Mexico, Venezuela, Saudi Arabia, and Nigeria. Of the total 

volume imported, approximately 2.9 million bpd was heavy crude oil
similar to the crude oil that would be transported by the proposed
Project; Mexico and Venezuela were the major suppliers. However,
imports of heavy crude oil from these two countries have been in steady
decline while Gulf Coast refining capacity is projected to grow by
at least 500,000 bpd by 2020, with or without the proposed Project.
