#### 3.12.1.2 Regulatory Requirements

**Greenhouse Gas Regulatory Requirements**

On October 30, 2009, the EPA promulgated the first comprehensive national system for reporting emissions of carbon dioxide (CO2) and other GHG produced by major sources in the United States.
Through this new reporting, EPA will have comprehensive and accurate data about the production of GHG in order to confront climate change.
Approximately 13,000 facilities, accounting for about 85 to 90 percent of industrial GHG emitted in the United States are covered under the rule.
The new reporting requirements apply to suppliers of fossil fuel and industrial chemicals, manufacturers of certain motor vehicles and engines (not including light and medium duty on-road vehicles), as well as large direct emitters of GHG with emissions equal to or greater than a threshold of 25,000 metric tpy.
This threshold is equivalent to the annual GHG emissions from just over 4,500 passenger vehicles.
The direct emission sources covered under the reporting requirement include energy intensive sectors such as cement production, iron and steel production, electricity generation, and oil refineries, among others.
The gases covered by the rule are CO2, methane (CH4), nitrous oxide (N2O), hydrofluorocarbons (HFC), perfluorocarbons (PFC), sulfur hexafluoride (SF6), and other fluorinated gases, including nitrogen trifluoride (NF3) and hydrofluorinated ethers (HFE).
Because CO2 is the reference gas for climate change, measures of non-CO2 GHG are converted into CO2-equivalent values (CO2-e) based on their potential to absorb heat in the atmosphere.
The first annual report would be submitted to EPA in 2011 for the calendar year 2010, except for vehicle and engine manufacturers, which would begin reporting for model year 2011.

According to the preamble of the rule, the U.S. petroleum and natural gas industry encompasses hundreds of thousands of wells, hundreds of processing facilities, and over a million miles of transmission and distribution pipelines.
Crude oil is commonly transported by barge, tanker, rail, truck, and pipeline from production operations and import terminals to petroleum refineries or export terminals.
Typical equipment associated with these operations includes storage tanks and pumping stations.
The major sources of CH4 and CO2 fugitive emissions include releases from tanks and marine vessel loading operations.
EPA does not propose to include the crude oil transportation segment of the petroleum and natural gas industry in this rulemaking due to its small contribution to total petroleum and natural gas fugitive emissions (accounting for much less than 1 percent) and the difficulty in defining a facility.
The responsibility for reporting would instead be placed on the processing plants and refineries.
Consequently, the proposed pipeline Project would not trigger GHG reporting requirements.

On June 2, 2010, the EPA issued a final rule that establishes an approach to addressing GHG emissions from stationary sources under the CAA permitting programs.
These stationary sources would be required to obtain permits that would demonstrate they are using the best practices and technologies to minimize GHG emissions.
The rule sets thresholds for GHG emissions that define when the CAA permits under the NSR/PSD and the Title V Operating Permits programs are required for new or existing industrial facilities.
The rule "tailors" the requirements to limit which facilities will be required to obtain NSR/PSD and Title V permits and cover nearly 70 percent of the national GHG emissions that come from stationary sources, including those from the nation's largest emitters (e.g., power plants, refineries, and cement production facilities).

For sources permitted between January 2, 2011 and June 30, 2011, the rule requires GHG permitting for only sources currently subject to the PSD permitting program (i.e., those that are newly-constructed or modified in a way that significantly increases emissions of a pollutant other than GHG) and that emit GHG emissions of at least 75,000 tpy.
In addition, only sources required to have Title V permits for non- GHG pollutants will be required to address GHG as part of their Title V permitting (note: the 75,000 tpy CO2-e limit does not apply to Title V).
For sources constructed between July 1, 2011 and June 30, 2013, the rule requires PSD permitting for first-time new construction projects that emit GHG emissions of at least 100,000 tpy even if they do not exceed the permitting thresholds for any other pollutant.
In addition, sources that emit or have the potential to emit at least 100,000 tpy CO2-e and that undertake a modification that increases net emissions of GHG by at least 75,000 tpy CO2-e will also be subject to PSD requirements.
Under this scenario, operating permit requirements will for the first time apply to sources based on their GHG emissions, even if they would not apply based on emissions of any other pollutant.
Facilities that emit at least 100,000 tpy CO2-e will be subject to Title V permitting requirements.
The proposed Project is not subject to PSD and would have emissions of CO2-e less than the applicable thresholds for any of the stationary sources (i.e., construction camp, tank farm, and surge relief tanks).
Note that emissions from fugitive dust and mobile sources (on-road and non-road) are not included in the emission estimates for permit applicability of a stationary source.
Consequently, the proposed Project would not be subject to the federal GHG permitting rule.
EPA plans further rulemaking that would possibly reduce the permitting thresholds for new and modified sources making changes after June 30, 2013.

Information on the cumulative impacts of GHG and climate change are addressed in Section 3.14.3.14 of the SDEIS.

[...]


**Greenhouse Gases and Climate Change**

Contribution to cumulative impacts from GHG would result directly from construction and operation of the proposed Project.
Contribution to cumulative impacts from GHG could also result from activities indirectly related to the proposed Project (e.g., crude oil extraction, refining, and refined product end uses) if those activities were affected by the proposed Project.
Many commenters expressed concern on the level of analysis within the draft EIS concerning indirect GHG impacts from production in the WCSB oil sands, from refining the WCSB crude oil that would be transported by the proposed Project, and from end uses of refined products originating from that crude oil.
The principal GHG are carbon dioxide (CO2), methane (CH4), nitrous oxide (N2O), ozone, and water vapor.
The reference gas for climate change is CO2 and, therefore, measures of non-CO2 GHGs are converted into CO2-equivalent (CO2-e) values based on their potential to absorb heat in the atmosphere.
The principal GHG of concern related to the proposed Project is CO2, which enters the atmosphere through the burning of fossil fuels (e.g., oil, natural gas, and coal), solid waste, and trees and wood products, and as a result of other chemical reactions (e.g., manufacture of cement).
CO2 is removed from the atmosphere (or "sequestered") when it is absorbed by plants as part of the biological carbon cycle or through other natural and anthropogenic methods.

Climate change is defined by the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change as "a change of climate which is attributed directly or indirectly to human activity that alters the composition of the global atmosphere and which is in addition to natural climate variability observed over comparable time periods" (EPA 2008).
Natural processes (e.g., changes in the sun's intensity, slow changes in the Earth's orbit around the sun, animal respiration, and changes in ocean circulation) and human activities (e.g., fossil fuel combustion, deforestation, reforestation, and urbanization) affect emissions of GHG. The accumulation of GHG in the atmosphere affects the Earth's temperature; however, emissions from human activities have caused the concentrations of heat-trapping GHG to increase significantly in the atmosphere.
These gases prevent heat from escaping to space, somewhat like the glass panels of a greenhouse.
This accumulation has contributed to an increase in the temperature of the Earth's atmosphere and to climate change.
If GHG continue to increase, climate models predict that the average temperature at the Earth's surface could increase from 3.2 to 7.2 ºF above 1990 levels by the end of this century (IPCC 2007).
Most scientists agree that human activities are changing the composition of the atmosphere, and that increasing the concentration of GHG affects climate change.
The rate, intensity, and effects of climate change continue to be assessed.
For example, the increased concentration of CO2 in the atmosphere has increased ocean acidity since pre-industrial times (EPA 2009).
The extent of ocean acidification is correlated with atmospheric CO2 concentration.
Ocean acidification affects future climate change by diminishing the ocean's capacity to absorb increasing atmospheric CO2.

**Regulations and Standards Relating to Greenhouse Gases**

**Federal Programs**

On April 2, 2007, in Massachusetts v. EPA, 549 U.S. 497, the Supreme Court found that GHG are air pollutants covered by the CAA. The Court held that the EPA Administrator must determine whether or not emissions of GHG from new motor vehicles cause or contribute to air pollution which may reasonably be anticipated to endanger public health or welfare, or whether the science is too uncertain to make a reasoned decision.
In making these decisions, the Administrator is required to follow the language of Section 202(a) of the CAA. The Supreme Court decision resulted from a petition for rulemaking under Section 202(a) filed by more than a dozen environmental, renewable energy, and other organizations.
As a result of this decision, on April 24, 2009, the EPA proposed the Endangerment and Cause or Contribute Findings for Greenhouse Gases under the CAA to find that the current and projected concentrations of the mix of six key GHG (CO2, CH4, N2O, HFC, PFC, and SF6) in the atmosphere threaten the public health and welfare of current and future generations.
This is referred to as the endangerment finding.
The Administrator is further proposing to find that the combined emissions of CO2, CH4, N2O, and HFC from new motor vehicles and motor vehicle engines contribute to the atmospheric concentrations of these key GHG and hence to the threat of climate change.
This is referred to as the cause or contribute finding.
This proposed action, as well as any final action in the future, would not itself impose any requirements on industry or other entities.
An endangerment finding under one provision of the CAA would not by itself automatically trigger regulation under the entire Act.

On October 30, 2009, the EPA promulgated the first comprehensive national system for reporting emissions of CO2 and other GHG produced by major sources in the United States.
Through this new reporting, EPA will have comprehensive and accurate data about the production of GHG in order to confront climate change.
Approximately 13,000 facilities, accounting for about 85 to 90 percent of industrial GHG emitted in the United States are covered under the rule.
The new reporting requirements apply to suppliers of fossil fuel and industrial chemicals, manufacturers of certain motor vehicles and engines (not including light and medium duty on-road vehicles), as well as large direct emitters of GHG with emissions equal to or greater than a threshold of 25,000 metric tpy.
This threshold is equivalent to the annual GHG emissions from just over 4,500 passenger vehicles.
The direct emission sources covered under the reporting requirement include energy intensive sectors such as cement production, iron and steel production, electricity generation, and oil refineries, among others.
The gases covered by the rule are CO2, CH4, N2O, HFC, PFC, SF6, and other fluorinated gases, including nitrogen trifluoride (NF3) and hydrofluorinated ethers (HFE).
The first annual report would be submitted to EPA in 2011 for the calendar year 2010, except for vehicle and engine manufacturers, which would begin reporting for model year 2011.

According to the preamble of the rule, the U.S. petroleum and natural gas industry encompasses hundreds of thousands of wells, hundreds of processing facilities, and over a million miles of transmission and distribution pipelines.
Crude oil is commonly transported by barge, tanker, rail, truck, and pipeline from production operations and import terminals to petroleum refineries or export terminals.
Typical equipment associated with these operations includes storage tanks and pumping stations.
The major sources of CH4 and CO2 fugitive emissions include releases from tanks and marine vessel loading operations.
EPA does not propose to include the crude oil transportation segment of the petroleum and natural gas industry in this rulemaking due to its small contribution to total petroleum and natural gas fugitive emissions (accounting for much less than 1 percent) and the difficulty in defining a facility.
The responsibility for reporting would instead be placed on the processing plants and refineries.

On June 2, 2010, the EPA issued a final rule that establishes an approach to addressing GHG emissions from stationary sources under the CAA permitting programs.
These stationary sources would be required to obtain permits that would demonstrate they are using the best practices and technologies to minimize GHG emissions.
The rule sets thresholds for GHG emissions that define when the CAA permits under the NSR/PSD and the Title V Operating Permits programs are required for new or existing industrial facilities.
The rule "tailors" the requirements to limit which facilities will be required to obtain NSR/PSD and Title V permits and cover nearly 70 percent of the national GHG emissions that come from stationary sources, including those from the nation's largest emitters (e.g., power plants, refineries, and cement production facilities).

For sources permitted between January 2, 2011 and June 30, 2011, the rule requires GHG permitting for only sources currently subject to the PSD permitting program (i.e., those that are newly-constructed or modified in a way that significantly increases emissions of a pollutant other than GHG) and that emit GHG emissions of at least 75,000 tpy.
In addition, only sources required to have Title V permits for non- GHG pollutants will be required to address GHG as part of their Title V permitting (note: the 75,000 tpy CO2-e limit does not apply to Title V).
For sources constructed between July 1, 2011 and June 30, 2013, the rule requires PSD permitting for first-time new construction projects that emit GHG emissions of at least 100,000 tpy even if they do not exceed the permitting thresholds for any other pollutant.
In addition, sources that emit or have the potential to emit at least 100,000 tpy CO2-e and that undertake a modification that increases net emissions of GHG by at least 75,000 tpy CO2-e will also be subject to PSD requirements.
Under this scenario, operating permit requirements will for the first time apply to sources based on their GHG emissions, even if they would not apply based on emissions of any other pollutant.
Facilities that emit at least 100,000 tpy CO2-e will be subject to Title V permitting requirements.
EPA plans further rulemaking that would possibly reduce the permitting thresholds for new and modified sources making changes after June 30, 2013.

On December 2, 2010, the EPA released its guidance for limiting GHG emissions based on the CAA requirement for new and modified emission sources to employ BACT to limit regulated air pollutants.
As a result, the guidance focuses on the process that state agencies will use as they are developing permits for individual sources to determine whether there are technologies available and feasible for controlling GHG emissions from those sources.
The guidance is not a formal rulemaking and does not establish regulations, but it provides permitting authorities more detail on EPA expectations for the implementation of its new GHG permitting requirements.

On April 1, 2010, the EPA and USDOT finalized a new joint regulation for GHG emissions and fuel economy for model years 2012 through 2016 light duty vehicles.
The EPA regulates GHG emissions from passenger vehicles up to 8,500 pounds gross vehicle weight rating (plus medium-duty SUVs and passenger vans up to 10,000 pounds).
The program sets standards for CO2 emissions on the U.S. federal test procedure.
Equivalent Corporate Average Fuel Economy (CAFE) regulations, measured in miles per gallon of fuel consumed, were simultaneously established by the USDOT National Highway Traffic and Safety Administration (NHTSA).

**State Programs**

Programs for GHG emissions are being adopted by some states along the proposed Project corridor.
Montana is a member of the Western Climate Initiative (WCI).
The WCI is a collaborative effort of seven U.S. states and four Canadian provinces to identify, evaluate, and implement measures to reduce GHG emissions in participating jurisdictions.
The WCI has a regional GHG target of 15 percent below 2005 levels by 2020 to be met through a regional market-based multi-sector mechanism, as well as other policies.
The recommended cap-and-trade program has a broad scope that includes six GHG (CO2, CH4, N2O, HFC, PFC, and SF6) and will cover 90 percent of GHG emissions from the region when fully implemented.
The cap-and-trade program will begin January 1, 2012.

The Governor of Nebraska, along with 10 other midwestern Governors and 1 Canadian province Premier, is a member of the Energy Security and Climate Stewardship Platform for the midwest.
The Platform lists goals for energy efficiency improvements, low-carbon transportation fuel availability, renewable electricity production, and carbon capture and storage development.
In addition to goals related to energy efficiency, renewable energy sources, and biofuel production, the Platform lays out objectives with respect to carbon capture and storage (CCS).
Members agreed to have in place a regional regulatory framework for CCS by 2010, and by 2012 to have sited and permitted a multi-jurisdiction CO2 transport pipeline and have in operation at least one commercial-scale coal-powered integrated gasification combined cycle (IGCC) power plant with CCS, with additional plants to follow in succeeding years.
By 2020, all new coal plants in the region will capture and store CO2 emissions.
Numerous policy options are described for states to consider as they work towards these goals.
The Platform also lays out 6 cooperative regional agreements.
These resolutions establish a Carbon Management Infrastructure Partnership, a Midwestern Biobased Product Procurement System, coordination across the region for biofuels development, and a working group to pursue a collaborative, multi-jurisdictional transmission initiative.
States adopting all or part of the Platform include Wisconsin, Minnesota, South Dakota, Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Michigan, Missouri, Nebraska, North Dakota, and Ohio, as well as the Canadian Province of Manitoba.

Kansas, on November 15, 2007, joined 5 other states and one Canadian province to establish the Midwestern Regional Greenhouse Gas Reduction Accord.
Under the Accord, members agree to establish regional GHG reduction targets, including a long-term target of 60 to 80 percent below current emissions levels, and to develop a multi-sector cap-and-trade system to help meet the targets.
Participants also establish a GHG emissions reductions tracking system and implement other policies, such as low-carbon fuel standards, to aid in reducing emissions.

In South Dakota, on February 21, 2008, Governor Mike Rounds signed into law HB 1272, which established a voluntary Renewable Portfolio objective of 10 percent by 2015. Oklahoma and Texas currently do not have state initiatives addressing the reduction in GHG, although Senate Bill 184 required the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ) to develop and present a report to the legislature by December 31, 2010, recommending strategies to reduce the GHG emissions by businesses and consumers of the state.

**Low Carbon Fuel Standard**

The first low carbon fuel standards (LCFS) were enacted in California in 2007. Since then, other jurisdictions (e.g.
British Columbia and the European Union) have enacted similar standards.
These standards generally require that overall carbon values for transportation fuels decrease by 10 percent over the next decade, although the definition of fuels and the percent reduction over time differ across jurisdictions.
More carbon-intensive fuels include those derived from crude oil sources in the WCSB, Venezuela, Nigeria, the Middle East, and California (IHS CERA 2010).
The impact of LCFS on U.S. market demand for oil sands crude oil is speculative at this time since few jurisdictions have implemented these standards.
Barr (2010) analyzed the potential for the implementation of an LCFS policy to actually result in an increase in GHG emissions because of a "shuffling," where the fuels sector would support the most inexpensive avenues to comply with the LCFS, thereby shuffling production and sales that may double GHG emissions resulting from crude oil transport to and from areas affected by the LCFS policy.
The report suggests that an approved LCFS would result in increased GHG emissions based on a reduction of crude oil imported from Canada and subsequent rerouting of crude imports and exports to account for this displacement.
If LCFS were increasingly required in the U.S., this would be expected to discourage overall U.S. imports of oil sands crude from Canada, and in turn would encourage importing of crude oil to the U.S. from areas that produce light sweet crude, likely the Middle East.
Canadian crude sources would be diverted to other countries not affected by LCFS, and supplies in the U.S. negatively affected by LCFS requirements would be replaced with supplies from more distant parts of the world.

**Cumulative Effects of GHG**

Neither the federal government nor states crossed by the proposed Project have established thresholds for determining the significance of GHG emissions.
While no final thresholds currently exist, this assessment of the direct and indirect contributions of the proposed Project to global GHG emissions was conducted in accordance with CEQ draft guidance for GHG (CEQ 2010) that established a draft threshold for NEPA purposes of 25,000 metric tpy for CO2-e.
There is a general scientific consensus that the cumulative effects of GHG have influenced climate change on a global scale, which is considered a significant cumulative effect.

**Construction and Operation Emissions**

As discussed in Section 3.12, the GHG emissions during construction of the proposed Project would total approximately 236,978 tpy of CO2-e over the construction period and direct GHG emissions during proposed Project operation would total approximately 85 tpy of CO2-e.
Indirect GHG emissions associated with electrical generation for the proposed Project pump stations are estimated at approximately 2.6 to 4.4 million tons of CO2 per year for a proposed initial capacity of 700,000 bpd and a potential capacity of 830,000 bpd, respectively, as calculated using EPA AP-42 emission factor for large diesel engines and assuming 30 pump stations with 79 to 132 pumps rated at 6,500 hp.
This contribution to cumulative GHG impacts from proposed Project construction and operation is very small compared to total GHG emissions for the United States (CO2 equivalents from anthropogenic activities) which totaled 7,054 million tons in 2006, and global CO2 emissions which totaled 28,193 million tons in 2005 (CO2 equivalents from fuel combustion) (EPA 2008).
Construction activities associated with the proposed Project for each year represent less than 0.003 percent and 0.0008 percent of the national and global GHG emissions, respectively.
While the EPA has released proposed regulations that would require approximately 13,000 facilities nationwide to monitor and report their CO2 and other GHG emissions, the proposed Project would not satisfy the definition of these regulated facilities and there are no federal regulations or guidance to definitively identify the significance of the GHG emissions associated with operation of the Project.
Although the GHG emissions associated with construction of the proposed Project would be greater than the CEQ draft threshold of 25,000 tpy of CO2-e that is suggested as a useful presumptive threshold for disclosure during NEPA review, the overall contribution to cumulative GHG impacts from proposed Project construction and operation would not constitute a substantive contribution to the U.S. or global emissions.

**Indirect Cumulative Impacts and Life Cycle Greenhouse Gas Emissions**

The following discussion on GHG life cycle emissions associated with oil sands is provided in response to comments on the draft EIS. DOS is providing this information as a matter of policy, although the proposed Project would not substantively influence the rate or magnitude of oil extraction activities in Canada, or the overall volume of crude oil transported to the U.S. or refined in the U.S. (EnSys 2010).
To assist in addressing concerns relative to GHG, the DOS third party contractor requested that ICF International LLC (ICF) a detailed review of key studies in the existing literature that address life-cycle GHG emissions of petroleum products, including petroleum products derived from Canadian oil sands, and a comparison of life cycle GHG emissions reported in the literature for Canadian oil-sands derived crude oil and refined products with those of reference crude oils.
A summary of the ICF report is presented in the following sections and the full report is presented in Appendix B of this SDEIS.

**Introduction**

The EnSys (2010) report commissioned by DOE evaluated potential influences of the proposed Project on global, U.S., and regional oil demand; the effect of that demand on continued or expanded development of WCSB oil sands crude oil sources; and assessments of global life-cycle GHG impacts under 14 separate crude oil transportation scenarios.
As a part of that analysis, EnSys estimates the changes in life- cycle GHG emissions resulting from these scenarios, including a "no expansion" scenario (i.e., a scenario in which no additional pipelines beyond those in operation as of late 2010 are constructed to transport crude oil from WCSB).
The GHG emissions estimated for each scenario are related to quantities of specific WCSB oil sands-derived crude oils produced and their respective life-cycle GHG intensity.
The EnSys (2010) analysis relied on the life-cycle GHG emission factors developed by the DOE National Energy Technology Laboratory (NETL 2008 and NETL 2009).[^17] NETL's estimates address a range of the world crude oils consumed in the U.S., including the WCSB oil sands crude oils as well as the "average crude" consumed in the U.S. in 2005.[^18] Because the NETL-developed emission factors were selected to be a key input to the EnSys (2010) analysis and to EPA's renewable fuel regulations, they serve as an important reference case for evaluating life-cycle emissions for different crude sources.
Thus, while this section provides an assessment of the differences between the life-cycle GHG emissions associated with Canadian oil sands-derived crudes that may be refined in the United States versus reference crudes, it also specifically compares results from other literature against the NETL studies' base case.
A more detailed description of the ICF review is provided in Appendix B of this SDEIS.

[^17]: EnSys used factors from the "NETL: Petroleum-Based Fuels Life Cycle Greenhouse Gas Analysis -- 2005 Baseline Model," which were applied for each scenario within the DOE version of the Energy Technology Perspective (ETP) model.

[^18]: This 2005 average serves as the baseline in the U.S. Renewable Fuel Standard Program (EPA 2010).

**Life‐Cycle Carbon Overview**

Evaluating life-cycle emissions provides a method to assess the relative GHG emissions between various sources of crude oil.
The life-cycle assessment (LCA) methodology attempts to identify, quantify and track carbon emissions arising from the development and use of a hydrocarbon resource.
It is helpful to characterize carbon emissions into what can be considered primary and secondary flows.
The primary carbon emissions are associated with the various stages in the life cycle from the extraction of the crude from the reservoir to refining to combustion of the refined fuel products (typically referred to as a "well-to-wheels" analysis).
The secondary carbon emissions are associated with activities (e.g., land use impacts) not directly related to conversion of the hydrocarbon resource into useful product fuels.

Most of the GHG emissions from hydrocarbon resource development results from three primary steps in the LCA: production of the crude oil, refining of the crude oil, and combustion of the refined products.
Transportation of the crude oil to the refinery and transportation of the products to market also contribute to GHG emissions.
The primary objective of refining crude oil is to produce three premium refined products: gasoline, diesel, and kerosene/jet fuel.
These primary GHG emissions associated with fuel production drive the economics and engineering of the oil business.
In addition to the primary emissions arising from the production, transportation, refining, and combustion steps of the LCA, there is a range of secondary carbon emissions to be considered.
For example, extracting crude can influence secondary GHG emissions, such as changes in biological or soil carbon stocks resulting from land-use change during mining.
In addition to premium fuels, typically 5 to 10 percent of the carbon in the petroleum resource ends up in co-products, such as petroleum coke, that are often (but not always) combusted and converted to CO2. As discussed in greater detail below, these secondary flows are treated differently across the LCA literature and estimates of specific process inputs and emission factors vary according to the underlying methods and data sources used in each LCA.

The GHG emission factors modeled by NETL are based on a well-to-wheels (WTW) LCA. 
WTW assessments for petroleum-based fuels focus on the GHG emissions associated with extraction of the crude oil from reservoirs, transportation of crude oils to refineries, refining of the crude oil, distribution of refined product (e.g., gasoline, diesel, and jet fuel) to retail markets, and combustion of these fuels in vehicles or planes.
For some WCSB oil sands crude oils, the assessment also addresses upgrading of the extracted crude oil (i.e., partial refining of some oil sands crude oils to produce synthetic crude oil).
Other analyses (e.g., well-to-tank [WTT] analyses) establish different life-cycle boundaries and evaluate only the emissions associated with the processes prior to combustion of the refined products.
Inclusion of the combustion phase allows for a more complete picture of crude oil contribution to GHG emissions because this phase represents between approximately 70 to 80 percent (depending on crude source) of the WTW emissions (CERA 2010).
As a result, a WTW analysis reduces the differential in total GHG emissions between different crude oil sources.
Because a WTT analysis focuses on pre-combustion processes, it highlights the differences in upstream life-cycle GHG emissions associated with the extraction, transportation, and refining of crude oils from different sources, as illustrated in a comparison of Figures 3.14.3-1 and 3.14.3-2.

**Scope of Review of Life‐cycle Studies**

A list of the reports reviewed for this assessment is presented in Table 3.14.3-9. The primary studies and additional supplemental reports for the assessment were selected on the following basis:

• The reports evaluate WCSB oil sands crude oils in comparison to crude oils from other sources;

• The reports focus on GHG impacts throughout the life-cycle of crude oils and their related products;

• The reports were published within the last 10 years, and most were published within the last five years;

• The reports represent the perspectives of various stakeholders, including industry, governmental organizations, and non-governmental organizations; and

• The reports originate from research bodies within the United States, Canada, and international locations.


**TABLE 3.14.3-9 Primary and Additional Studies Evaluated [^a]**

**Primary Studies Analyzed Type**

NETL. 2008. Development of Baseline Data and Analysis of Life Cycle Greenhouse Gas Emissions of Petroleum-Based Fuels.

Individual LCA

NETL 2009. An Evaluation of the Extraction, Transport and Refining of Imported Crude Oils and the Impact of Life Cycle Greenhouse Gas Emissions.

Individual LCA

IEA. 2010. World Energy Outlook.
Meta-analysis IHS CERA. 2010. Oil Sands, Greenhouse Gases, and U.S. Oil Supply: Getting the Numbers Right.

Meta-analysis

NRDC. 2010. GHG Emission Factors for High Carbon Intensity Crude Oils ver. 2. Meta-analysis Energy-Redefined LLC for ICCT. 2010. Carbon Intensity of Crude Oil in Europe Crude.
Individual LCA AERI/Jacobs Consultancy. 2009. Life Cycle Assessment Comparison of North American and Imported Crudes.

Individual LCA

AERI/TIAX LLC. 2009. Comparison of North American and Imported Crude Oil Lifecycle GHG Emissions.

Individual LCA

Charpentier, et al. 2009. Understanding the Canadian Oil Sands Industry's Greenhouse Gas Emissions.

Meta-analysis

**Additional Studies/Models Analyzed Type**

RAND Corporation. 2008. Unconventional Fossil-Based Fuels: Economic and Environmental Trade-Offs.

Individual LCA

Pembina. 2005. Oil Sands Fever: The Environmental Implications of Canada's Oil Sands Rush.

Partial LCA

Pembina. 2006. Carbon Neutral 2020: A Leadership Opportunity in Canada's Oil Sands. Oil sands issue paper 2.

Partial LCA

McCann and Associates. 2001. Typical Heavy Crude and Bitumen Derivative Greenhouse Gas Life Cycles.

Individual LCA

Pembina. 2011. Life cycle assessments of oil sands greenhouse gas emissions: A checklist for robust analysis.

White Paper

GHGenius. 2010. GHGenius Model, Version 3.19. Natural Resources Canada.
Model GREET. 2010. Greenhouse Gases, Regulated Emissions, and Energy Use in Transportation Model, Version 1.8d.1. Argonne National Laboratory.

[^a:] See Appendix B of this SDEIS for more information on each study.

For WCSB oil sands crude oils, the assessment focused on those that could be transported through the proposed Project.
Based on this criterion, the solid, raw bitumen from oil sands was eliminated except to the extent that it is included within averaged results (e.g., NETL provides a single WCSB oil sands estimate that represents a weighted average of 43 percent crude bitumen from *in situ* production and 57 percent SCO from mining).

This assessment addresses three types of WCSB oil sands crude oils that are extracted either by mining or the *in-situ* thermal processes.
Conventional strip-mining methods are used to extract oil sands deposits that are less than about 75 meters below the surface.[^19] To recover deeper deposits of oil sands, *in situ* methods are used. *In situ* recovery methods typically involve injecting steam into an oil sands reservoir to heat -- and thus decrease the viscosity of -- the bitumen, enabling it to flow out of the reservoir sand matrix to collection wells.
Steam is injected using cyclic steam stimulation (CSS), where the same well cycles between periods of steam injection and bitumen production, or by steam-assisted gravity drainage (SAGD), where a pair of horizontal wells is drilled; the top well is used for steam injection, and the bottom well for bitumen production.
Due to the high energy demands for steam production, steam injection *in situ* methods are generally more GHG-intensive than mining operations.
The WCSB crude oil types assessed in this study are described briefly below:

[^19:] Mining accounts for roughly 48 percent of total bitumen capacity in the WCSB oil sands as of mid-2010 (IEA 2010, p. 152).

• Synthetic crude oil (SCO) − SCO is produced from bitumen via a refinery conversion of heavy hydrocarbons to lighter hydrocarbons.
While SCO can be sour, it is usually a light, sweet crude oil without heavy fractions.

• Dilbit (diluted bitumen) − Dilbit is bitumen blended with a diluent, usually a natural gas liquid such as condensate, to create a "lighter" product and to reduce viscosity so the dilbit can be transported via pipeline.
Dilbit feedstock processing requires more heavy oil conversion capacity than most crude oils.

• Synthetic bitumen (synbit) *--* Synbit is usually a combination of bitumen and SCO. The properties of synbit blends vary greatly, but blending lighter SCO with heavier bitumen results in a product more similar to conventional crude oil than SCO or dilbit alone.

The reference crudes evaluated in the literature reflect a range of sources and GHG emissions and include:

• The average U.S. barrel consumed in 2005 (from NETL 2008).
This reference was selected because it provides a baseline for fuels produced from the average crude consumed in the United States.

• Venezuela Bachaquero and Mexico Maya, which are representative of heavy crudes currently refined in PADD III refineries.
It is assumed that these crude oils would be displaced or replaced by the WCSB oil sands crude oil that would be transported by the proposed Project, although it is likely that they would find markets elsewhere and would still be produced.

• Saudi Light (i.e., Middle East Sour), which was taken to be the balancing grade for world crude oil supplies in EnSys (2010).
This is the crude that may ultimately be backed out of the world market if additional supply of WCSB oil sands crudes is produced.

**Evaluation of Key Factors Influencing the GHG Results**

There are many differences in the **study design factors** and **input assumptions** for life-cycle GHG analyses of WCSB oil sands crude oils relative to the four reference crude oils.

**Study design factors** relate to how the GHG comparison is structured within each study.
These factors include the overall purpose and goal of the study, the types of crudes and refined products that are compared to each other, the timeframe over which the results of the study are applicable, the life-cycle boundaries established to make the comparison, the functional units or the basis used for comparing the life-cycle GHGs for crudes or fuels to each other (e.g., expressing GHG emissions per unit of crude, SCO, all refined products, or specific refined products such as gasoline or diesel, in terms of volume, energy, or distance units), and the treatment of co-products other than gasoline, diesel, and jet fuels (e.g., asphalt, petroleum coke, liquefied refinery gases, and lubricants).
Some studies allocate a fraction of the GHG emissions from refining to these co-products and exclude these emissions from the life-cycle boundary (i.e., they are not included within the studies' life-cycle results).
Other studies include these emissions but assign credits for GHG emissions from other sources that are offset by combustion of the co-products (e.g., electricity exported from a refinery replaces natural gas-fired power generation, and petroleum coke from a refinery replaces coal).

Key design factors across the studies identified through this assessment are summarized in Table 3.14.3- 10. In general, the studies reviewed are consistent in their treatment of some factors (e.g., generally excluding emissions associated with land-use changes) but vary in their treatment of other factors (e.g., emissions from petroleum coke and electricity cogeneration).
Most studies exclude land-use change and the emissions arising from the construction of capital infrastructure.
Importantly, only a few studies modeled the effect that upgrading SCO has on downstream GHG emissions at the refinery.
Several (but not all) studies include the following:

• Upstream production of purchased fuels and electricity used to power machinery in the oil fields and at refineries;

• Flaring and venting;

• Fugitive emissions; and

• Methane emissions from oil sands mining and tailings ponds.

**Input assumptions** impact life-cycle analysis results and assumptions are input at each life-cycle stage.
Due to limited data availability and the complexity of and variation in the practices used to extract, process, refine, and transport crude oil, studies often use simplified assumptions to model GHG emissions.
For example, for both WCSB oil sands crude oils and reference crude oils, assumptions about how much petroleum coke is produced, stored, and combusted at the upgrader or refinery, and how much is sold to other users, are key drivers of GHG emission estimates.
Transportation assumptions have a more limited effect, but vary across the studies.
Key input assumptions for WCSB oil-sands-derived crude oils include:

• Type of extraction process (i.e., mining or *in situ* production);

• Steam-oil ratio assumed for *in situ* operations;

• Efficiency of steam generation, and thus its energy consumption; and

• Upgrading processes modeled for SCO and whether or not estimated refinery GHG emissions account for upgrading.

For the reference crudes, key input assumptions include the oil-water and gas-oil ratios that are used to estimate reinjection and venting or flaring requirements, and whether and what type of artificial lift is considered for extracting crude oil.

Life-cycle GHG emissions for gasoline produced from WCSB oil sands crude oils relative to other reference crude oils consumed in the United States, as reported by NETL (2009) are summarized in Table 3.14.3-11. The results are subject to several input assumptions that influence the results of the analysis.
These assumptions and their estimated scale of impact on the WTW results are summarized in the last two columns of Table 3.14.3-11.

**TABLE 3.14.3-10 Summary of Key Study Design Features that Influence GHG Results**

**Estimated Relative WTW Impact:[^a] High Medium Low**

**Source Data**

**Reference Year(s)**

**NETL 2008** 2005 No NS Yes Yes No NS Yes No No NS

**NETL 2009** 2005 No NS Yes Yes No NS NS No No NS

**IEA 2010** 2005-2009 NS NS Yes NS NS Yes NS No NA NS

**IHS CERA 2010** ~2005-2030 V V No NS NS V NS No NA V

**NRDC 2010** 2006-2010 NSg NSg P NS NS NS NS No NA NS

**ICCT 2010** 2009 NS No P Yes No NS Yes No No NS

**AERI/Jacobs 2009** 2000s Yes Yes Yes Yes No No No No Yes No

**AERI/TIAX 2009** 2007-2009 P P Yes Yes No Yes Yes No Yes Yes

**RAND 2008** 2000s NS NS NS Yes No Yes Yes No No Yes

**Pembina Institute 2005** 2000, 2004 NS NS NS P No NS P No No NS

**Pembina Institute 2006** 2002-2005 NS NS No P No Yes Yes No No Yes

**McCann 2001** 2007 P NS Yes NS No NS NS No NS NS

**GHGenius 2010** Current Yes No Yes Yes No Yes Yes Local NS Yes

**GREET 2010** Current NS NS Yes Yes No NS Yes No NS NS

****3-193**

Notes: Yes = included in life-cycle boundary; No = not included; P = partially included; NS = not stated; NA = not applicable; V = varies by study addressed in meta-study.

[^a]: High impact = greater than 3% change in WTW emissions.
Medium impact = 1 -- 3% change in WTW emissions.
Low impact = less than 1% change in WTW emissions.

[^b]: "Yes" indicates that GHG results for products such as gasoline, diesel, and jet fuel do include petroleum coke production and combustion. "No" indicates that GHG emissions from petroleum coke production and combustion were not included in the system boundary for gasoline, diesel, or jet fuel.
The effect of including petroleum coke depends on how much is assumed to be stored at oil sands facilities versus sold or combusted, and whether a credit is included for coke that offsets coal combustion.

[^c]: "Yes" indicates that the study applied a credit for electricity exported from cogeneration facilities at oil sands operations that offsets electricity produced by other power generation facilities. "No" indicates a credit was not applied.
Including a credit for oil sands will reduce the GHG emissions from oil sands crudes relative to reference crudes.

[^d]: Indicates whether studies included GHG emissions from the production of fuels that are purchased and combusted on-site for process heat and electricity (e.g., natural gas).

[^e:] Indicates whether the study included GHG emissions from the construction and decommissioning of capital equipment such as buildings, equipment, pipelines, rolling stock.

[^f:] Indicates whether refinery emissions account for the fuel properties of SCO relative to reference crudes.
Since SCO is upgraded before refining, it requires less energy and GHG emissions to refine into gasoline, diesel, and jet fuel products.

[^g:] Not discussed in the meta-study; may vary by individual studies analyzed.

**TABLE 3.14.3-11 GHG Emissions for Producing Gasoline from Different Crude Sources from NETL 2009 and Estimates of the Impact of Key Assumptions on the Oil Sands-U.S. Average Differential**

**GHG Emissions (g CO2e/MJ LHV gasoline)[^a]**

**Findings on Key Assumptions Influencing Results**

**Life-Cycle Stage 2005 U.S.**

**Average Canadian Oil Sands**

**Venezuela Conventional Mexico Saudi**

**Arabia Description Estimated Ref Crude**

**WTW Impact[^b]**

Crude Oil Extraction 6.9 20.4[^c] 4.5 7.0 2.5

Upgrading NA IE NA NA NA

DOE/NETL uses a weighted average of 43% crude bitumen from in situ production and 57% SCO from mining

NA

Crude Oil Transport 1.4 0.9 1.2 1.1 2.8 Relative distances vary by

Low increase or decrease

Refining 9.3 11.5d 11.0 12.9 10.4 Did not evaluate impact of upgrading SCO prior to refinery; only affects oil sands.

Medium decrease

Finished Fuel Transport 1.0 0.9 0.9 0.9 0.9 Transportation excluded co-product distribution

Low increase

Total WTT 18.6 33.7 17.6 22.0 16.7

Fuel Combustion 72.6 72.6 72.6 72.6 72.6

Fuel combustion excluded combustion of petroleum coke and other co-products

Low to high increase

Total WTW 91.2 106.3 90.2 94.6 89.3 Difference from 2005 U.S. Average

0% 17% -1% 4% -2%

Notes: IE = Included Elsewhere; NA = Not Applicable.
LHV = Lower Heating Value.
WTT = Well-to-Tank; WTW = Well-to-Wheels.

[^a]: NETL 2009 values converted from kilograms of CO2-equivelant per million BTU using conversion factors of 1,055 mega joules per million BTU and 1000 g/kg.

[^b:] Estimated impact on the WTW GHG emissions for reference crudes, except where noted (i.e., refining assumption affects oil sands), as result of addressing the key assumptions/ missing emission sources.
High = greater than approximated 3% change, Medium = approximated 1 -- 3% change, and Low = less than approximated 1% change in WTW emissions.

[^c:] Included within extraction and processing emissions.

[^d: Calculated by subtracting other process numbers from WTT total; report missing this data point.

[^e: The effect that including petroleum coke combustion has on WTW results depends upon assumptions about the end-use of petroleum coke and whether it is used to offset coal in electricity generation.

For example, NETL (2009) only considered combustion emissions from gasoline, diesel, and kerosene- type jet fuel and allocated the refinery emissions from co-products other than gasoline, diesel, and jet fuel to the co-products themselves.
This approach removes the GHG emissions associated with producing and combusting co-products from the study's life-cycle boundary.
This approach is consistent with DOE/NETL's objective of estimating the contribution of crude oil sources to the 2005 baseline GHG emissions profile for three transportation fuels (gasoline, diesel, and kerosene-type jet fuel).
A portion of the petroleum coke produced from partial refining (upgrading) of WCSB oil sands crudes is stockpiled (sequestered) in Alberta and does not contribute to GHG emissions, whereas virtually all of the petroleum coke produced at U.S. refineries is ultimately combusted.
As explained in more detail in the appendix on GHG emissions, if petroleum coke produced from refineries is assumed to offset coal combustion, however, the net emissions from coke combustion will be much smaller.
As a result, the effect of including petroleum coke combustion depends upon study assumptions about the end use of petroleum coke at both the refinery and upgrader, and whether petroleum coke use offsets other fuels, such as coal.

Additionally, the NETL study used linear relationships to relate GHG emissions from refining operations to specific crudes based on API gravity and sulfur content.
The study notes that these relationships do not account for the fact that bitumen blends (dilbits and synbits) and SCO in particular will produce different fractions of residuum and light ends than "full-range" crudes.
Accounting for the variable properties of these crude oil types and resulting refinery GHG emissions would change the differences between WTW GHG emissions for premium fuels refined from WCSB oil sands-derived crude oils relative to reference crude oils.

**GHG Intensity of WCSB Crudes**

The wide variation in design and input assumptions within the various studies leads to a wide divergence in calculated GHG emissions.
Based on an extensive review of information provided in the studies reviewed, the WTW and WTT GHG emissions of gasoline produced from WCSB oil sands-derived crude oils were compared to similar emission estimates from four reference crude oils (see Figures 3.14.3-1 and 3.14.3-2).
Additional information on the data sources and assessment is available in Appendix B of this SDEIS.

As shown in Figure 3.14.3-1, the NETL WTW GHG emission estimates from gasoline produced from WCSB oil sands-derived crude oils are 17 percent higher than that the GHG emission estimates for gasoline produced from the average mix of crude oils consumed in the United States in 2005, and are approximately 19, 13, and 16 percent higher than GHG emission estimates for Middle East Sour, Mexican Heavy (i.e., Mexican Maya), and Venezuelan[^20] crude oils, respectively (NETL 2009).

The WTW emission estimates for gasoline produced from SCO via *in situ* methods of oil sands extraction (i.e., SAGD and CSS) in general are higher than the GHG emission estimates for mining extraction methods (Figure 3-14.3-1).
This difference is primarily attributable to the energy requirements of producing steam as part of the *in situ* extraction process.
According to all of the reviewed studies, gasoline produced from crude oils extracted by both methods produces more life-cycle GHG emissions than gasoline produced from the average mix of crudes consumed in the United States in 2005.  Gasoline produced from dilbit generally has lower estimated GHG life-cycle emissions than gasoline produced from bitumen extracted by mining and *in situ* methods.
This is a result of blending raw bitumen with a diluent (e.g., gas condensate) for transport via pipeline.
Diluent produces fewer GHG emissions than bitumen, so blending the two together results in lower WTW GHG emissions.
This assessment evaluates the refining of both bitumen and diluent at the refinery, since diluent will not be separated from the dilbit blend and recirculated by the proposed Project.
WTW GHG emission estimates from gasoline produced from synbit, a blend of SCO and bitumen, are similar to WTW GHG emission estimates for gasoline produced from SCOs produced from bitumen extracted by either mining or *in situ* methods.

Similar trends were evident in the WTT GHG analyses (see Figure 3.14.3-2).
The percentage increase in WTT GHG emission estimates for gasoline produced from WCSB oil sands-derived crude oils as compared to gasoline produced from reference crudes (Figure 3.14.3-2) is much larger than the percent increases for WTW GHG emission estimates (Figure 3.14.3-1).
Most of the gasoline life-cycle WTW GHG emissions occur during the combustion stage irrespective of the feedstock (i.e., reference crude or oil sands).
Because WTT GHG emission estimates do not include the combustion phase, the differences in GHG life-cycle emissions associated with crude oil extraction and refining are emphasized; when expressing the comparison in terms of percentage increases, the same incremental differences in the numerator are divided by a smaller denominator.

[^20:] NETL uses Venezuelan Conventional as a reference crude rather than Venezuelan Bachaquero.

The GHG emissions associated with different oil sands extraction, processing, and transportation methods vary by roughly 25 percent on a WTW basis.
Life-cycle GHG emission estimates for fuels produced from WCSB oil sands crude oils are higher than emission estimates for fuels produced from lighter crude oils, such as Middle East Sour crudes and the 2005 U.S. average mix.
Compared to heavier crude oils from Mexico and Venezuela, WTW emission estimates associated with fuels derived from WCSB oil sand-derived crude oils are 37 percent higher than for SAGD SCO (petroleum coke burned at the upgrader) and 2 percent lower for mining-derived SCO (including storing or selling the petroleum coke).

**Incremental GHG Emissions from Oil Sands Crudes Potentially Transported by the Proposed Project Compared to Reference Crudes**

As noted earlier in this chapter, based on the EnSys (2010) analysis, under most scenarios the proposed Project would not substantially influence the rate or magnitude of oil extraction activities in Canada, or the overall volume of crude oil transported to the U.S. or refined in the U.S. Thus, from a global perspective, the project is not likely to result in incremental GHG emissions.
According to the EnSys (2010) report there is sufficient transboundary pipeline capacity to transport oil sands crudes into the United States through approximately 2020 (although there is not sufficient capacity to meet PADD III market demand).[^21] Also, according to the EnSys (2010) report, there is an apparent market demand to put in place pipeline capacity similar to that of the proposed Project if the proposed Project is not implemented.
Thus, the proposed Project, if constructed, is unlikely to significantly accelerate displacement of reference crudes.
When evaluating the lifecycle GHG emissions of transportation fuels consumed in the United States in a strictly static format, however, it is likely that the lifecyle GHG emissions of transportation fuel produced from WCSB crudes is higher than that of reference crudes.
Such an analysis is not strictly necessary for purposes of evaluating the potential environmental impacts attributable to the proposed Project under NEPA, but is relevant and informative for policy-makers to consider in a variety of contexts.
For illustrative purposes, this section provides information on the incremental life-cycle GHG emissions (in terms of the U.S. carbon footprint) from WCSB oil sands crudes likely to be transported by the proposed Project (or any transboundary pipeline).
The incremental emissions are a function of (1) the throughput of the pipeline, (2) the mix of oil sands crudes imported, and (3) the GHG-intensity of the crudes in the pipeline compared to the crudes they displace.
Acknowledging the methodological differences in GHG-intensity estimates between the studies, the weighted-average GHG emissions for selected studies were calculated to estimate the incremental GHG emissions from WCSB oil sands relative to displacing an equivalent volume of reference crudes in U.S. refineries.

[^21:] Note that a substantial share of these emissions would occur outside of the United States.
Also note that the U.S. National Inventory Report, like other national inventories, only characterizes emissions within the national border, rather than using a life-cycle approach.
If the United States used a life-cycle approach, upstream emissions from other imported crudes would be attributed to the United States.

NETL (2009), Jacobs (2009), and TIAX (2009) formed the sub-set of studies used to develop weighted averages for purposes of the carbon footprint analysis.
These studies are independent analyses of WTW GHG emissions from oil sands and reference crudes that utilize consistent functional units for comparison with each other.
The other studies included in this assessment either did not look at the full WTW fuel life-cycle, did not evaluate emissions on a consistent functional unit basis for comparison, or are meta- analyses that include the results of the Jacobs (2009) and TIAX (2009)studies.

For illustrative purposes, Figure 3.14.3-3 shows the percent change in weighted-average GHG emissions from the mix of WCSB oil sands crude oil likely to be transported in the proposed Project relative to each of the four reference crudes.
The change in GHG emissions is calculated for the Jacobs (2009) and TIAX (2009) values by weighting the WTW GHG intensity of oil sands crudes by the composition of crudes that could be transported in the proposed Project.
For purposes of this assessment, it is expected that 50 percent of pipeline throughput would be SCO, and 50 percent would be dilbit.
All WCSB dilbit is currently produced using in situ production and 12 percent of SCO is produced via *in situ* methods (ERCB 2010), yielding a final mix of 50 percent *in situ*-produced dilbit, 44 percent mining-produced SCO, and 6 percent *in situ*-produced SCO.[^22] The results are representative of near term expected WCSB oil sands composition and GHG-intensities.

[^22:] Of *in situ* WCSB oil sands production from SAGD and CSS facilities, CSS accounts for 47 percent of production, and SAGD accounts for 53 percent.
This ratio was used to calculate an average for *in situ*-produced dilbit for TIAX, which provided separate estimates for CSS and SAGD dilbit.
Primary *in situ* production of WCSB bitumen (i.e., using conventional oil production techniques) was not included since estimates were not provided in the studies included in the scope of this assessment.
Primary production currently accounts for 32.9 thousand cubic meters per day, or 14 percent of total oil sands production (ERCB 2010).

The Canadian oil sands average from NETL (2009) is also plotted on Figure 3.14.3-3 for comparison with Jacobs (2009) and TIAX (2009), although the NETL result assumes a mix of 43 percent crude bitumen and 57 percent SCO. The results show a 2 to 19 percent increase in WTW GHG emissions from the weighted-average mix of oil sands crudes potentially transported in the proposed Project relative to the reference crudes in the near term.
Heavier crudes generally take more energy to produce and emit more GHGs than lighter crudes, and in particular, the weighted-average WCSB oil sands crude is currently more energy- and carbon-intensive than lighter crudes like Middle Eastern Sour.

For illustrative purposes, Table 3.14.3-12 shows the incremental annual WTW GHG emissions associated with displacement of 100,000 barrels of each reference crude oil per day (equivalent to 80,000 barrels per day of refined gasoline and distillate products) with WCSB oil sands crude oil using the weighted-average estimate for the mix of WCSB oil sands crudes likely to be transported in the proposed Project.
The incremental GHG emissions were calculated by subtracting from the WTW GHG emissions an equivalent displaced volume of each reference crude.
As previously noted, these estimates provide an example of the potential effect on the U.S. carbon footprint, on a life-cycle basis, resulting from displacement of reference crude oils in PADD III refineries; on a global scale, emissions are not likely to change.

**Crude with WCSB Oil Sands (MMTCO2-e)**

**U.S. Average (2005)**

**Middle Eastern**

**Sour Mexican**

**Maya Venezuelan**

NETL, 2009 2.4 2.7 1.9 2.6 Jacobs, 2009 2.6 1.5 0.9 0.9 TIAX, 2009 2.1 2.2 1.8 0.4

Note: Venezuelan conventional crude values for NETL refer to a medium crude, not the heavy crude Venezuelan Bachaquero.

As noted elsewhere in the EIS, the near-term initial throughput of the proposed Project is projected to be 700,000 barrels of crude per day with a potential capacity of 830,000 barrels per day.[^23]
To the extent that  Middle Eastern Sour is the world balancing crude, as indicated in EnSys (2010), it may ultimately be the crude that is backed out of the world market by WCSB oil sands crudes.
Taking into account the weighted average mix of WCSB oil sands (e.g., SCO versus dilbit) in the near term that would be transported through the proposed Project, the incremental increase in the U.S. carbon footprint on a life- cycle basis relative to Middle Eastern Sour is likely in the range of 10 to 19 million metric tons of CO2 equivalent (MMTCO2-e) annually at initial pipeline capacity or 12 to 23 MMTCO2-e annually at potential capacity.
This incremental increase in GHG emissions from WCSB relative to reference crudes is calculated by multiplying the expected proposed Project throughput of equivalent gasoline and distillate (560,000 barrels per day at initial capacity or 664,000 barrels per day at potential capacity) by the weighted-average WTW GHG intensity of oil sands crudes that could be transported in the pipeline, and subtracting WTW GHG emissions from the equivalent quantity of Middle Eastern Sour crude (taking into account differences in the yield of gasoline plus diesel product for WCSB versus Middle Eastern crudes).
The range of incremental GHG emissions is calculated based on the results from NETL 2009, Jacobs 2009, and TIAX 2009. The lower bounds of 10 and 12 MMTCO2-e for the initial and potential capacities, respectively, are calculated from Jacobs (2009) results; the upper bounds of 19 and 23 MMTCO2-e for the initial and potential capacities, respectively, are calculated from NETL (2009).

[^23:] We assumed the pipeline would be operating 365 days a year at an *initial* capacity of 700 thousand barrels per day, yielding 560 thousand barrels per day of gasoline and distillate fuels, or 204.4 million barrels of gasoline and distillate fuels annually.
At its *potential* capacity of 830 thousand barrels per day, 242.4 million barrels of gasoline and distillate fuels would be produced annually.

From another perspective, WCSB oil sands crude oils could be compared to the heavy crude oils currently being processed in PADD III refineries (primarily Venezuelan Bachaquero and Mexican Mayan).
The incremental increase in GHG emissions from the initial throughput of 700,000 barrels per day of WCSB in comparison to these crude oils is likely in the range of 3 to 18 MMTCO2-e annually as compared to Venezuelan reference crudes (with the upper end being the NETL value for a medium, rather than heavy, crude) and 6 to 13 MMTCO2-e annually as compared to Mexican Maya.
Scaling up the calculation for a scenario using the potential throughput of 830,000 barrels per day of WCSB, the incremental increase in GHG emissions is in the range of 3 to 21 MMTCO2-e annually as compared to Venezuelan reference crudes, and 7 to 16 MMTCO2-e annually as compared to Mexican Maya.

The full range of incremental GHG emissions estimated across the reference crudes and sub-set of studies is 3 to 19 MMTCO2-e annually at the near term initial throughput or 3 to 23 MMTCO2-e annually at the potential throughput.
This overall range of 3 to 23 MMTCO2-e is equivalent to annual GHG emissions from the combustion of fuels in approximately 588,000 to 4,510,000 passenger vehicles or the CO2 emissions from combusting fuels used to provide the energy consumed by approximately 255,000 to 1,950,000 homes for one year.[^24]

[^24:] Equivalencies based on EPA's GHG Equivalency calculator available at: http://www.epa.gov/cleanenergy/energy- resources/calculator.html

The differentials presented here are based on life-cycle emission estimates for current or near-term conditions in the world oil market, as can be seen from the reference years used in each report.
Over time, however, the GHG emission estimates for fuels derived from both WCSB oil sands crude oils and the reference crude oils are likely to change.

GHG emissions from the production phase for reference crude oils will become more energy-intensive over time due to the need to extract oil from deeper reservoirs by using more energy-intensive secondary and tertiary recovery techniques, such as CO2 flood.
The reference crude oil reservoirs are one to two miles (or more) underground or under the ocean floor.
In contrast, the WCSB oil sands deposits are much shallower and can be extracted using either surface mining or near-surface *in situ* methods.
Exploration efforts for new deep oil reservoirs will continue as known reservoirs continue to deplete.

In contrast, the extent of the WCSB oil sands deposits is well understood and defined.
In the future, *in situ* extraction methods are projected to represent a larger share of the overall oil sands production, increasing from about 45 percent of 2009 oil sands production to an estimated 53 percent by 2030 (ERCB 2010).
In particular, the share of SAGD *in situ* extraction methods are projected to rise from roughly 15 percent in 2009 to 40 percent of oil sands production in 2030 (CERA 2010).
The GHG profile of this more energy-intensive oil sands extraction method may be reduced by new technologies and innovations to reuse steam onsite and/or improve thermal recovery and in response to incentives created by Alberta's climate policy requiring reductions in GHG emissions intensity from large emitters in the province.
However, surface mining is projected to remain the dominant extraction method for WCSB crude oils for the next 20 years (CERA 2010).
In consideration of these factors, it is likely that GHG intensity for future reference crude oils will be trending upward while the GHG intensity for WCSB oil sands-derived crude oils will be relatively constant to slightly upward.
If this is the case, the differential in life-cycle GHG emissions for fuels refined from these crude oils is likely to decrease.

**Conclusions**

The studies show conclusively that combustion (i.e., tank-to-wheels) phase of the fuel life-cycle dominates the total GHG life-cycle emissions under all scenarios.
Overall, it is clear that comparisons of GHG life-cycle emission estimates for fuels derived from different sources are sensitive to the choice of boundaries, consistent application of boundary conditions within studies, and to key input parameters.
In particular, the results depend on assumptions regarding the use of petroleum coke at oil sands facilities, and upon the weighted-average mix of WCSB oil sands crude transported to the United States by the proposed Project or some other transboundary pipeline.
SAGD and CSS *in situ* production methods are generally more GHG-intensive than mining, and while SCO requires upgrading prior to pipeline transport, bitumen blends such as dilbit and synbit require additional refining emissions and do not produce an equivalent amount of premium fuel products per barrel input.

Despite the differences in study design and input assumptions, it is clear that WCSB crude oils, as would likely be transported through the proposed Project, are on average somewhat more GHG-intensive than the crudes they would displace in the U.S. refineries.
Although EnSys (2010) reported that there would be no substantive change in global GHG emissions as a result of construction of the proposed Project, and no substantive change in WCSB crude oil imports into the United States whether the project is implemented or not, the life-cycle GHG emissions associated with transportation fuels produced in U.S. refineries would increase with increased imports of WCSB crude oils.

As discussed more fully in the appendix, the GHG intensity of reference crudes is very likely to increase in the future as more and more of the world crude supply requires extraction by increasingly energy intensive tertiary and enhanced oil recovery techniques.
The energy intensity of surface mined Canadian crudes will be relatively constant while higher energy intensive in-situ production may increase somewhat; the proportion of in situ extraction is forecast to increase relative to the less energy-intensive surface mining.
Although there is some uncertainty in the trends for both reference crudes and oil sands, on balance it is likely that the gap in GHG intensity will decrease over time.

**Climate Change**

Over the past 30 years, changes in the U.S. climate have included an increase in average temperature, an increase in the proportion of heavy precipitation events, changes in snow cover, and an increase in sea level (CCSP 2008).
Climate change can exacerbate stresses on ecosystems through high temperatures, reduced water availability, and altered frequency of extreme precipitation events and severe storms (CCSP 2008).
However, climate change can also ameliorate stresses on ecosystems through warmer springs, longer growing seasons and related increased productivity (CCSP 2008).

Anticipated impacts from climate change in North America applicable to the regions crossed by the proposed Project include:

• Stream temperatures are likely to increase and are likely to have effects on aquatic ecosystems and water quality;

• Proliferation of exotic grasses and increased temperatures are likely to cause in increase in fire frequency in arid lands; and

• Decreased streamflow, increased water removal, and competition from non-native species are likely to negatively affect river ecosystems in arid lands (CCSP 2008).

While there are uncertainties in the future of climate change, the response of ecosystems and the effects of management should allow ecosystem adaptations that would reduce anticipated damages or enhance beneficial responses associated with climate variability and change (CCSP 2008).
Throughout development of the proposed Project, efforts to reduce overall Project-related impacts have been incorporated into the proposed Project.
The proposed CMR Plan (Appendix B of the draft EIS) includes construction procedures that would apply directly to the reduction of anticipated climate change-related induced impacts described above, including:

• Restoration of riparian habitats at stream crossings (Sections 3.3 and 3.7 of the draft EIS);

• Prevention of the spread and establishment of noxious and invasive weeds (Section 3.5 of the draft EIS);

• Prevention of the spread of aquatic invasive species (Section 3.7 of the draft EIS); and

• Limiting water withdrawal rates to less than 10 percent (or lower depending on permit requirements) of the base flow and returning water used for hydrostatic testing to the same drainage (Sections 3.3 and 3.7 of the draft EIS); and

• Avoid, minimize, and mitigate impacts to wetlands, including depressional wetlands (Section 3.4 of the draft EIS) that may decrease in abundance due to increased evaporation with increased temperature.

The potential impacts of climate change would not be expected to affect the proposed Project.
An increase in temperatures may increase wildfires in the proposed Project area.
Any increased intensity of storm events could result in additional flooding in some areas near the proposed Project within the Gulf Coast Segment and Houston Lateral, particularly if hurricane activity increases as a result of oceanic temperature conditions.
The proposed Project would be designed and constructed to be consistent with applicable federal, state, and local standards, and therefore should be resistant to forces associated with reasonably likely climate conditions during the lifetime of the pipeline system.
Other effects of climate change, such as air quality degradation, health effects, reduced snow pack, and disruption to agricultural production, would not likely impact the proposed Project.
