U.S. DEPARTMENT OF STATE KEYSTONE XL PIPELINE OIL PROJECT September 29, 2011 Pierre, South Dakota 57502 12:00 p.m. 19 20 Reported by:  CHARLES D. HOFFMAN 2 APPEARANCES 2 JAMES STEELE, U.S. Department of State, presiding officer. 4 5 6 7 8 9  PROCEEDINGS    
MR. STEELE: Ladies and gentlemen, I'd like to go ahead and get the meeting started. We have a goodly number that would like to make comments. So let's go ahead and get started, so that we can make the best use of our time. Hello, good afternoon, my name is Jim Steele. I am from the U.S. Department of State, the United States Department of State. On behalf of the public meeting on the proposed Keystone XL Pipeline. We recognize that this is an important issue, and we value your input. the public to express their views on whether issuing a presidential permit for the proposed Keystone XL Pipeline is in the national interest. To focus time and attention on your comments, we will not be answering questions at this or at any of the other public meetings that are taking place this week in Nebraska, Kansas, Oklahoma, Montana and in Washington D.C. next month. We appreciate the interest of every single individual in this room to take the time to share your perspectives on this issue. We take your comments seriously and will consider them carefully. We understand that there are strong views and feelings about this issue. This is an opportunity for you to express those views. But we ask that you respect the rules that we have established, so that We ask that you be fair and respectful to everyone who has taken the time to come here. Before we begin, I would like to describe the permitting process and to lay out the ground rules for participating in today's meeting. In September of 2008, TransCanada Keystone Pipeline LP filed an application for a presidential permit for the proposed Keystone XL Pipeline. Executive Order 13337 signed on April 30th, 2004, delegates to the Department of State the authority to issue a presidential permit for facilities, such as Keystone XL Pipeline, that cross the United States' border. In considering a permit, the Department of State determines whether allowing the border crossing is in the United States' national interest, taking into account environmental and safety issues as well as energy security, foreign policy and social and economic concerns. In addition to the executive order, the 10 department determined, because of the importance of this proposed pipeline, that it should evaluate the pipeline's possible environmental and safety impacts, consistent with the National Environmental 14 Policy Act, or NEPA. As a consequence, the State Department prepared an environmental impact statement, consistent with NEPA, to evaluate the proposed pipeline's potential environmental and safety impacts. In preparing that environmental impact statement over the last 2 1/2 years, we have conducted 41 public meetings along the pipeline route and in Washington D.C. in order to gather public comments in developing the scope and the draft of the environmental impact statement. On August 26th, we released the final environmental impact statement, which addresses the more than 250,000 comments from the public that we received during the public comment period. The final environmental impact statement is just one factor considered in the review process. The final final decision on the permit application. Now, as we move toward the national interest determination, the Department of State is compiling Keystone XL Pipeline is in the national interest and to decide whether to grant or deny the permit. The ground rules for the meeting today. In order to maximize public participation and to be fair to the participants, we ask that you abide by these rules of order. We hope to have the opportunity to listen to everyone that wishes to speak. But in order to allow the maximum amount of participation, we ask you to limit your comments to three minutes. Given the interest in this issue, it may not be possible for everyone in attendance here today to speak. If you do not have the opportunity to speak, you can still provide your written comments on the back of the information sheet that was handed to you when you came into the building today. You can write your comments on that sheet and leave them either at the table in the back or the back. You can also mail your comments in. You can fax them in. You can e-mail them or you can submit your comments online. We will consider all submit those comments by October 9th. Speakers will make their comments today on a fist come, first served basis, by assigned number, having signed in personally at the door outside. After one speaker ends, the next number and name will be called, and to speed things up, I'll probably wind up calling four speakers at a time, so that you have time to prepare yourself to come on up. Since we can not anticipate exactly how long a person will speak, we can't really tell you exactly when you will be up to speak. When your number is called, we ask that you come to the microphone, state your name, affiliation, and offer your comments. And please note that there are two sets of microphones. interval, a card will be displayed when you have one minute remaining and when your time is up. That card says thank you; we appreciate your comments, 12 but it's time to finish up so somebody else can have a chance. If you run out of time, again, you can submit your comments in written form. And I assure you that they will be considered. They will have the same weight as if you had delivered them orally. Again, the handout specifies the procedures you can take to e-mail, fax or mail your comments in. All oral comments and written comments will be considered as part of our decision. They will be reviewed by the Department of State and during the decision making process. Your oral comments here today will be recorded and then transcribed by a court reporter. Other written comments will be accepted, again, until October 9th. Department of State officials are here to considered. We will not be in a question and answer session today. Again, we understand that there are strong views on this issue, and we ask that in speak be allowed to do so without interruption. We request that no signs, no displays be posted in the building. As we mentioned earlier, please do keep your remarks to no more than three minutes, and please be respectful of others. I ask also that you turn off cell phones or set them to the silent setting. We plan on ending this meeting at 8:00 o'clock this evening. We will break for 30 minutes at about 3:30 and resume at about 4:00 o'clock. I would like to stress, once again, that the Department of State has not yet made a decision on this matter. That is the purpose of this meeting, to give members of the public the opportunity to make comments that will be considered when we are deciding whether to issue or to grant or whether to deny that application for the presidential permit. 6 Thank you very much for your interest, and thank you very much for coming to this meeting. Before I start with the speakers, I would like to call please Mr. Nathan Sanderson, the policy advisor 10 to Governor Daugaard, who will deliver a short statement on behalf of the governor.  
MR. SANDERSON: Thank you Mr. Steele. Again, my name is Nathan Sanderson, I'm a policy advisor to South Dakota Governor, Dennis Daugaard. I've got a letter on the governor's behalf, addressed to Secretary of State Hillary Clinton. "Secretary Clinton, as you know, the U.S. Department of State published the final environmental impact statement for Keystone XL Pipeline Project and is now holding public meetings to collect comments and determine if the project is in the national interest. Thank you for holding this public meeting in South Dakota. It is important that people have the opportunity to voice their comments. This is especially true for private landowners whose land may be crossed by the proposed Much of the land in South Dakota that will be crossed by the pipeline is private property, and landowners hold a precious, even sacred, bond to resources are critically important to our ability to live here as well. Based on the conclusions of the environmental impact statement, I believe the Keystone XL Pipeline can and will be safely operated in South Dakota. But I do not rely solely on the federal environmental impact statement to reach that conclusion. The 2008 South Dakota State Legislature, sharing many of your concerns, required the formation of the South Dakota Underground Pipeline Task Force to evaluate the adequacy of existing regulations pertaining to pipelines in South Dakota. The task force, after a thorough public review of all aspects of pipeline operation in South Dakota, determined existing laws and regulations were adequate to ensure the safe and reliable operation in our state. If you would like 5 to review the task force's findings, the final report is available on the Department of Environment and Natural Resources website. In addition, both the Keystone and Keystone XL 9 Pipeline Projects have been thoroughly vetted through the South Dakota Public Utility Commission's permitting process. This process included significant public input and formal hearings to review the facts and concluded for both pipelines, in the issuance of permits by the commission. One of the many facts discussed was the economic benefit of the project for South Dakota. Between 1,100 and 1,400 workers will be employed during construction, and once in operation, the Keystone XL Pipeline will generate approximately 10 million dollars per year in property taxes, boosting revenue for affected local governments and school districts. Extensive public records from the hearing process for both pipelines are now available on the website of the Public Utilities Commission. We now have even more evidence to support the Pipeline will be done safely and reliably. TransCanada conducted an emergency field exercise during September 2010 and the results were responded in a timely and appropriate manner to four minor pump station releases on the existing Keystone XL Pipeline in South Dakota. The stated purpose of this hearing is to determine if the Keystone XL Pipeline is in the national interest. There has been much recent focus by President Obama and the U.S. Congress on growing our national economy and creating jobs. In South Dakota, we share those goals. One avenue we are pursuing is to mimic the success of our North Dakota neighbors by building new tools to encourage and promote more oil and gas exploration and development. However, one of the limiting factors for oil and gas development in the region is a lack of pipelines available to move crude oil to market. link helps alleviate this problem. Through this link, up to 100,000 barrels per day of crude oil from the Williston Basin will be transported to U.S. 7 refining markets. The region needs more pipeline capacity to maximize our oil and gas production. The Keystone XL Pipeline will provide some of this needed capacity, which in turn will benefit domestic oil production. In short, I urge you to grant approval to build the Keystone XL Pipeline. Thank you again for bringing this public meeting to South Dakota. Sincerely, South Dakota Governor, Dennis Daugaard." With your permission, Mr. Steele.    
MR. STEELE: Okay, let's get started please. I would like to call Mr. John Meyer, Mr. Jim Doolittle and Ms. Karen Wagner, please.  
MR. MEYER: Thank you for the opportunity to speak today. I'm representing small businesses in South Dakota. As a business owner of 30 years 2 and former president of the South Dakota Retail Association, whether directly or indirectly, all businesses are reliant on a stable oil supply, which is why I signed on with the Partnership to Fuel 6 America. This new group of business leaders and companies and opinion leaders have come together to promote stable and secure North American energy development. By developing the North American energy resources, the United States will create thousands of jobs right here in America, while also increasing our security by decreasing our dependence on unstable oil producers, such as the Middle East. Increasing demands on the same oil from China and India will only limit supply and drive up prices. One of the first issues the Partnership to Fuel America is focused on is the proposed Keystone XL Pipeline expansion. The Keystone Pipeline carries crude oil from the tar sands in Canada and drops it off at refineries in the Midwest and Texas. The proposed expansion to this system would increase 16 the capacity of the pipeline from 591,000 barrels a day to 1 million barrels a day, in addition to the opportunities to using our own states with oil resources, such as Wyoming, North Dakota, Montana 4 and South Dakota. Building the Keystone expansion will pump thousands of dollars into South Dakota's economy, while bringing hundreds, if not thousands of workers to our state. And even though I'm not a construction worker or manufacturer, I joined the Partnership to Fuel America because, as a business owner, I recognize that these workers and dollars will have an energizing effect on our state and region. Many businesses along the construction route, including mine, will see more customers and higher profits. Between new jobs and new workers relocating here, living in the area and spending more money, our region and South Dakota as a whole will see over 10 million in state and local revenues. I see value in this pipeline beyond just more than customers walking through my doors. Everyone will benefit, and it will be a welcome boom to our individuals, the backbone of our entire economy are relying on Keystone XL Pipeline for more than just stable oil. They are relying on it as a stable economy and a better life. South Dakota has a balanced budget due to leaders that believe and understand business. I hope our leaders recognize the investment and return of partnership with TransCanada Keystone Pipeline will bring to our state. Let's not regulate and litigate like other states that are millions and billions in the hole. Thank you TransCanada for your investment in America. Thank you.    
MR. STEELE: Can I verify that you are John Meyer?  
MR. MEYER: Pardon?  
MR. STEELE: Are you John Meyer?  
MR. MEYER: Yes.  
MR. STEELE: Okay. Please, as you come forward to speak, please remember to state your name 1 and your affiliation, thank you.  
MR. DOOLITTLE: Okay, my name is Jim Doolittle. My wife and I are landowners and ranchers in Harding County, which is located in the northwestern part of the state, close to the North Dakota, Montana borders. We are member of the Partnership to Fuel America and the proposed pipeline will cross approximately four miles of our property. Thank you for conducting this hearing in South Dakota, and to begin with, I would like to say that we are very strong supporters of the project. We have been since we first heard of it three or four years ago and continue to be. We think this is a tremendous opportunity for America, North America, not only the local economy, where it will help increase the tax base for local subdivisions like school districts, counties, cities, but more importantly, the national interest. We think that's the biggest issue. The proposed pipeline will provide a stable oil 19 supply from a friendly trade neighbor, meaning Canada, and also provide jobs for U.S. workers. We think this is a safe and efficient way to transport oil, and we think it is needed for our economy. As landowners, will there be inconveniences? Yes, there will be probably some temporary inconveniences. But the positives, the advantages, far outweigh any temporary inconvenience. We feel this will be the safest pipeline in the world, and it's needed. This is really a no-brainer. The advantages far outweigh any disadvantages. I'd be glad to answer any questions you have. You have my name, I think. Thank you for the time.    
MS. WAGNER: Good afternoon, my name is Karen Wagner. I was born, raised and have lived in South Dakota my entire life. My husband and I are ranchers and landowners and the proposed Keystone TransCanada Pipeline will go through our land. I am here today to verbally express my support of the pipeline project. The project will provide an economic boost to our rural communities and our state. In addition to the positive economic boost, it is an opportunity to establish national security for America. Energy to fuel America is a necessity, and this pipeline provides a source close to our homeland via a route that is environmentally sound. Again, I support the pipeline and encourage approval of the project, and I thank you for the opportunity to be heard today.    
MR. STEELE: I remind you again that we do have another podium over here, which you can certainly use. The only thing I will ask is please check to make sure the microphone is on before you speak. Next, I would like to call Mr. Benjamin Snow, Ms. Blaise Emerson, Mr. Tom Sundly and Mr. Gary Lindblad.  
MR. SNOW: Good afternoon, my name is Benjamin Snow. I am the president of Rapid City Economic Development Partnership, and we are also supportive of the Partnership to Fuel America. Rapid City is the economic epicenter of not only Western South Dakota but for a region covering 1 57 counties and 5 different states, extending 200 miles from downtown Rapid City, and serving a population of over 470,000. Allow me to share with you a letter we 5 delivered to Secretary of State Clinton just last week, with copies to the South Dakota Congressional Delegation. "Dear Secretary Clinton: We are writing to express our strong support for EIS findings on the Keystone XL Pipeline and to urge you to approve the project by granting the presidential permit needed for construction to begin. We believe moving forward on this project is in the best interests of our region and country, and fully support it for three important reasons: Number one, economic growth. Keystone XL will provide significant economic benefits for our nation, state and region. The pipeline is expected to create approximately 20,000 manufacturing and construction jobs in the United States. It is expected to result in over 5 1/2 billion in new spending in the Keystone XL corridor states, 1 including 470 million in South Dakota. It will also generate an additional 5.2 billion in property taxes during the operating life of the pipeline. At a time when state and local 5 governments across the country are struggling to balance their budgets, these employment and revenue benefits are critical to our region. Number two, energy security. By increasing our access to energy supplies in Canada, our neighbor and loyal ally, as well as domestic supplies from the Bakken formation here at home, the pipeline will be critical to our country's efforts to reduce our dependence on middle eastern and Venezuelan oil, by as much as 40 percent. By providing refineries along the Texas Gulf Coast with more than 700,000 barrels of oil each day from domestic and Canadian resources, this pipeline will dramatically reduce our reliance on oil imports from volatile regions of the world. Number three, environmental sensitivity. As leaders from the region that the Keystone Pipeline of State's thoroughness, during the approval process, and appreciate the multiple opportunities for public input on the project, and it's potential The State Department has fully analyzed the project's environmental impact and the final EIS rightfully concludes that there are no substantial environmental concerns that should prevent construction of this valuable energy infrastructure project. We also have confidence that TransCanada will be a good steward of the land and that Keystone XL will be constructed using industry best practices and will meet or exceed all existing pipeline regulatory standards. The Keystone XL Pipeline is clearly in the nation's interest and will be a valuable tool in strengthening our economy, energy security and national security. Therefore, we respectfully request that, upon completion of this review period, the Department of State move expeditiously to approve the pipeline and grant TransCanada the Benjamin Snow, president; Al Rieman, chairman." Thank you.   director for Black Hills Community Economic Development. Black Hills Community Economic Development believes that this project is in the national interest of the United States for three different reasons: First, environmentally. Pipelines are one of the safest ways to transport this type of commodity through our region. Second, the EIS for this has found that this route is one of the most environmentally sound routes that they have identified. On the second point, on the economy. This will be a strong impact to the local economy, through property taxes, for providing a stable property base, also through sales tax revenue into many of our local communities, especially our small 25 communities, where this is a huge impact onto those communities. I also wanted to touch base just a little bit on the national security issue, also, of this 4 project. We are looking at a project that has impact with one of our longest, friendliest neighbors that we've had in our nation's history, which is Canada. We're looking at a reliable source of energy that we can use in our national economy, and so, this is something that we very strongly support. The Black Hills Community Economic Development, along with the Partnership to Fuel America, thinks this is a very important project for not just our local economy, but our region and our nation, and strongly urge the State Department to allow this project to go forward.    
MR. SUNDLY: Good afternoon. My name is Tom Sundly. I am from Harris, Minnesota. I'm a member of the Local 49 Heavy Equipment Operators Union. And we are here in support of this project 26 because of all the things you'll hear all day long. But the other thing to really sit back and remember is how dependent all of us are on gas and fuels and oils. All of us rode in some vehicle here today. 4 All of us will be going home in some kind of vehicle today. We need gas. We need the oil, and it would be a lot better to get it from a country who is willing to invest in our future than from countries that are basically taking some of our futures away, both in the military lives that they've taken away from us and in the money that they are sucking away from us. So, I encourage you in the State Department to think about and consider truly how this impact could be throughout the whole United States, let alone the states that are impacted directly by the pipeline going through their property. Thank you.    
MR. LINDBLAD: Good morning, my name is Gary Lindblad. I am a training director for the Operating Engineers that represents Minnesota, North Dakota and South Dakota. We have 13,000 members 27 throughout these three states. We have a training facility in Hinkley, Minnesota, where we do training. We train nearly 5,000 people a year there, and we provide classes for pipeline training 4 to do exactly this kind of work. We're very proud of the training we do. Our safety record is very high because of the training we do. And I very much support this pipeline that's going through South Dakota. It will encourage more development, more refineries, hopefully, maybe in South Dakota, more jobs, and more jobs for our operating engineers. So, I encourage you to please approve this pipeline. Thank you.    
MR. STEELE: I'd like to call, please, Mr. Jim DoLanghe, number nine; number ten, Mr. Ryan Scott; number eleven, Paul Lundquist and number twelve, Mr. Patrick McDonnell; please.  
MR. DOLANGHE: Hello, my name is Jim Dolanghe, and I'm an instructor with Local 49 Training Center. The way I view this pipeline, it's essentially 28 infrastructure designed to carry the petroleum just like a road would be our right of way. It's also and economic stimulus package that's privately revenue, generating revenue for individuals and their family income that's going to be spent in local communities, which will be multiplied several times over. They are going to pay taxes. They are going to get taxes in the community from the pipeline itself, and there will be an immediate and a sustained impact on the communities for a long time. It won't just affect this region, but it will affect the country as a whole. It also goes to energy stability. And everybody uses energy, and it will be a big shot in the arm for our community. So, thanks.    
MR. SCOTT: Good afternoon, my name is Ryan Scott, and I am with the Consumer Energy Alliance, and I'm here to speak in favor of the pipeline. At a very high level, I think this pipeline will create jobs and tax revenues. It will help to lower gas and diesel prices. It will improve our benefits you'll hear a lot today. I'd like to go a little bit into the Department of States' criteria that they specified, that you guys specified, you'll consider in the decision whether you will, in fact, permit this pipeline. The first criteria is environmental impact. The Department of State has found several times that this project would have a minimal negative environmental impact. Number two, impacts the proposed project on the diversity of oil supply to meet U.S. crude oil demand and energy needs. And the U.S. Department of Energy has recently concluded that building this pipeline would allow the U.S. to stop importing oil from places like Venezuela or Libya. Third criteria, security of the transport pathways. I think it's widely accepted that a pipeline is the safest, if not one of the most safest, ways to transport oil. You don't have to deal with hurricanes, pirates or anything of that manner. partner from which the United States obtains the oil. That's pretty easy; it's Canada. Number five, impact across border project and relations with the country to which it connects. Again, it's a pretty easy one. The impact would be a positive impact with Canada. Number six, the relationship between the United States and various suppliers of crude oil and the ability of the U.S. to work with these countries to meet overall energy security goals. And again, Secretary Chu from the Department of Energy has answered this question for us. Recently, he's already said, "Given a choice, we will choose Canadian oil." When we were talking about partners. What he didn't say is we're choosing Canada over Nigeria, over Libya, Venezuela, Saudi Arabia, et cetera. Number seven, the impact of the proposed projects on broader foreign policy objectives, including a comprehensive strategy to address climate change. In the case of oil sands, from well 3 to wheel, we're talking about 10 percent greater emissions. If we pass on this resource, this oil is going to be shipped elsewhere, using fossil fuel to cross the ocean. We'll be forced, as the U.S., to ship in more fuel as we are currently doing, to the Gulf refineries, and all of this will emit more carbon. I would say let's go with the common sense approach. Ship it with a pipeline instead of shuffling crude back and forth across the oceans. Number eight, economic benefits to the U.S.. I think it's clear. We talked about tax revenues, seven billion dollars in infrastructure, 20,000 jobs. Number nine, relationships between projects and goals to reduce reliance on fossil fuels and to increase the use of alternative and reliable renewable energy sources. I think that not approving this pipeline would not advance alternative and renewable fuels. In fact, it would choke the very economy that drives the tax base that allows this development to happen. You're talking about businesses, small and large, individuals who 3 are choosing between food and fuel, trucking companies that get us our goods that we use. We're talking about a lot of people, and it would actually be choking out this economy. The last thing the State Department issued was that this list is not exhaustive on all factors. I think it's clear. I think it's the right thing to do. It's seven million dollars in infrastructure we're not paying for. Please, build this pipeline. Please, permit this pipeline. Thank you very much.    
MR. LUNDQUIST: Good morning, my name is Paul Lundquist. I'm a proud member of Local 49, Equipment Operators Union, covering North, South Dakota and Minnesota. This proposed line is important to our members. It's important to our Midwest states and our country, as you will hear today. I live in Northern Minnesota where many pipelines have been put in and used without incident. I fish. I hunt. I enjoy the outdoors with my family throughout North support anything that would endanger that. Let's build this line to help the future generations. Thank you.    
MR. MCDONNELL: My name is Patrick McDonnell, and I represent the United Association of Plumbers, Pipefitters and Steamfitters. I'm here today to stand in support of this project. I feel we all need to be grateful for the jobs that this project will bring and create for my brothers and sisters, and for the taxes that will help our schools and our communities for the years and years to come. We also need to remember that this project will help the United States wean ourselves from depending upon oil which now comes mainly from the Middle East. Let's get 'er done. We need these jobs now.    
MR. STEELE: I'd like to call, please, Mr. Paul Struse, Mr. Bill Lombard, Mr. Martin Skye, Mr, Larry Mann, please. and sisters in construction and supporters of the pipeline, my name is Paul Struse. I'm a 10 year proud UA member, and I, along with my construction brothers, support the Keystone Project. This pipeline will help fuel America's economy where jobs have been sent overseas for years. Enough is enough. It's here now. It's funded, not by tax dollars. You may ask, how will this help our economy? Building this pipeline will support 20,000 jobs. Jobs that will build refineries, tax dollars for schools, education, jobs in trucking, jobs for chemists, jobs for engineers, jobs for small business, jobs for project managers, jobs for 49ers, operators, jobs for pipefitters, jobs for laborers, jobs for painters, carpenters, boilermakers, maintenance jobs. This will put food on our tables. These are jobs we need right now. Of all the wages that are made, think of the 401K, the pensions. It will be money invested in America. We need these jobs now. These are good paying jobs. are the number one priority. We are educated. We are good at what we do. We want to build this pipeline, and we want to be proud. We help boost America's economy. In closing, I want to thank the State Department. I want to thank these officers for making sure that the peace is held while we speak, as is our constitutional right as American citizens here in Pierre, South Dakota today. We are blessed to publicly speak, where a democratic process is held. I'm am Pauly the pipefitter, and I support this pipeline.    
MR. LOMBARD: Good morning, I'm Bill Lombard. I'm the training coordinator for Pipefitters Local 455. I support this Keystone XL Pipeline. I support the union brothers and sisters and families that need this pipeline built. I support the United Association's commitment to our military, to our returning veterans from Iraq that become skilled General President, Bill Hite. I support the pipeline that will bring the much needed revenue to financially strapped communities along this pipeline. Earlier today, I received a phone call from a brother pipefitter asking where I was. I'm usually in the office. And I said, "I'm in South Dakota, supporting this pipeline." And he said, "That's good. That's where you should be. That's where we need you to be." His brother actually worked on the Alaskan Pipeline when that was built, and we have a lot of fitters from 455 up there. And we trained the highly skilled, qualified people, craftsperson's that you need to have this pipe built. I told him I'm here because it's the right thing to do. Let's get this pipeline built. Thank you.    
MR. MANN: I hope we're in the right order here. My name is Larry Mann. I am President of Mann Strategies Inc. out of Rapid City. I've been development for the last 25 years. I was a member of the Black Hills Hydrology Study Steering Committee for its full 10 year process. So when it comes to reviewing environmental impact statements, I am, I guess as we say out west, this isn't my first rodeo. The one constant that appeared to me as I read through the EIS is that the product, the heavy crude from the tar sands in Canada, will make it to market. It is going to be refined in some manner or form, whether it's Indonesia, Japan, China or the United States. There is a demand for those products, so there is a certainty that this product will make it to market. And there are, of course, alternatives. There are tankers. There are railroad alternatives. There are trucking alternatives. But that product will make it to market. And I know that most of us represented here are strong proponents of alternative energy sources. And we can bemoan the fact that fossil fuels and, of choice for certain special interest groups. But we can't avoid the fact that our dependence on fossil fuels is going to last for at least another generation. The EIS recognizes that properly constructed and maintained pipelines like Keystone XL are the safest and most cost effective means of delivering oil supplies to refineries. Risk exists for every form of activity. The EIS suggests that most of the spill scenarios can be mitigated with proper safeguards. In conclusion, I hope that you'll approve and endorse the EIS and recommend approval of the presidential permit for Keystone XL. If we're not going to have a consistent energy policy in the United States that makes us truly energy independent, I would rather import heavy crude from Canada than buy one more barrel of oil from Hugo Chavez. Thank you very much.    
MR. SKYE: I want to thank you for giving 2 me a chance to speak, honorable people that are here, State Department and ladies and gentlemen in the audience. I am Martin Skye, real development director, United Sioux Tribes Development Corporation. And I have been asked to speak here by some of the tribes and present some of their views. United Sioux Tribes of South Dakota Development Corporation is a Lakota Dakota Sioux tribal organization whose Board of Directors is the elected chairman of presidents of 11 tribes in North Dakota, South Dakota and Nebraska. United Sioux Tribes contacted the U.S. State Department regarding lack of support from one Sioux tribe and virtually no consultation with Indian tribal governments, as reported by the Bismarck Tribune, on Saturday, the 19th of January 2008. Some tribes are not supporting this, due to a lack of consultation. I want to point that out. In fact, the distribution list of the supplemental draft environmental impact statement of the Keystone XL Project fails to show any Sioux chairman or president of a tribe as being provided a copy of the 2 draft EIS in South Dakota, as dated on April 22nd, 2011. Executive Order 13175 requires the U.S. State Department to establish regular and meaningful consultation and collaboration with the tribal officials in development of federal policies that have tribal implications to strengthen the United States government to government relationships with Indian tribes. To reduce the imposition of unfunded mandates upon Indian tribes, the Standing Rock Tribe of North Dakota and South Dakota opposes the Keystone XL Pipeline Project by resolution. Included in this are the Sisseton Wahpeton Oyate of the Lake Traverse Reservation, Rosebud Sioux Tribe, Yankton Sioux Tribe of South Dakota and the Santee Sioux Nation of Nebraska. The Santee Sioux Nation of Nebraska unsuccessfully filed suit against the State Department over this. How can Sioux tribal governments evaluate the merits of the Keystone XL Pipeline Project without being engaged in the Section 5B2A of Executive Order 13175? Tribal consultation is the cornerstone to Indian relations with the White House, wherein President Obama has acquired a detailed plan of actions the agency will take to implement the policies and directives of Executive Order 13175. Where is the tribal consultation policy from the U.S. State Department? If by sending letters to Sioux Indian tribal governments to participate in consultation is Department of State policy, then the agency is engaged in neither regular nor meaningful consultation with Indian tribes. Again, the issue is being consultation with the tribes. The progratic agreement developed by the State Department to guide consulting parties to our continued compliance was Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act, neither limits nor prevents any tribal governments from challenging the method or findings of the final environmental impact statement of the Keystone XL Pipeline project. energy development on their sacred sites and traditional cultural properties, then Sioux Indian tribal governments have a similar opportunity to stop the Keystone XL Pipeline and halt the TransCanada Corporation. Thank you for your time and consideration. Thank you again for letting me speak.    
MR. STEELE: I'd like to call now number 17, Mr. Jim Companion; Number 18, Mr. Dave Cerney; 19, Mr. Brad Dykes and 20, Mr. Myron Rau.  
MR. COMPANION: Yeah, my name is Jim Companion. I'm a member of the Operating Engineers. And with respect to the previous speaker, all the contractors are usually in compliance with the environmental rules and regulations. And I've been out of work for quite a while now, and I need a job. And like the gas tank on our car, it's essential to have a gas tank on your car. Well, jobs are essential too. Thank you.   1 
MR. CERNEY: Hi, I'm Dave Cerney, representing the International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers, the electricians for the job. Both local and non local workers and residents and their families can all benefit from this project. Remember the days of one or two dollars for a gallon of gas? The project will both benefit Canada and the United States, while providing good paying jobs both now and in the future and help out our dependency on foreign oil. Thank you.    
MR. DYKES: My name is Brad Dykes from Yankton, South Dakota. I am recently a retired store director of a major supermarket in Yankton. I was director during the construction period time of the original Keystone Pipeline in the Yankton area in the summer of 2009. I support the Keystone XL Pipeline because of the economic benefit that it will provide South Dakota. And this is based on our experience in 2009 with Keystone Construction in Yankton. The skilled construction pipefitters and workers bring their 1 families to town and really had an impact on our community. Let's take a look at some of the figures. These are public figures. From January to May, 2009, Yankton City taxable sales were trending down 2.27 percent. The recession hit Yankton right away in 2008. General tax sales collected were down 1.79 percent. After the construction period began in June, our general sales tax collected jumped to 10.35 percent increase in June, 4 percent increase in July, 8.7 percent in August. And after the construction period left, our taxable sales continued in a positive direction. The Keystone Pipeline construction was the boost that we needed in jobs and spending. While specific retail sales by individual businesses are confidential, I could not find a local business that did not directly benefit. Empty homes were rented and campgrounds were filled. TransCanada still employs several people in Yankton. I would expect the same type of economic benefit to happen during construction of Keystone XL 1 in South Dakota. The project is to include 10 million dollars in state and local tax revenues. We need jobs. The United States should support projects that boost employment and revenue, and Keystone XL will help provide a stable source of consistent energy supply over the long term, helping to support millions of American workers. With the current state of our economy, we must know that the pipeline is in the country's best interest. It's safe. I live in Yankton now, and we have a safe pipeline there. I ask that the State Department and the Obama Administration to stand up for American workers, get this economy moving again and approve the Keystone XL Pipeline. Thank you    
MR. RAU: Good afternoon, my name is Myron Rau. I'm currently employed as the president of the South Dakota Trucking Association. In my position, I serve approximately 560 companies that are involved in the transportation industry. We are a bit unique in that we move the products that keep 1 America moving. The trucking business involves the movement of household products, building supplies, agriculture products, food, construction materials, manufacturing supplies, along with manufactured products, motor vehicles, hazardous materials, including fuel and many, many other goods and products. In South Dakota we say, "If you have it, a truck brought it." With the responsibility and necessity of the trucking industry comes a huge need of fuel. In recent years, huge strides have been made with aerodynamics and engine production to boost fuel truck mileage. However, trucks still have a great demand for the fuel it takes to pull the loads required to meet the needs of people in this country. The proposed TransCanada Keystone XL Pipeline provides the United States with the opportunity to access safe, reliable and affordable energy supplies from Canada. A stable long term energy supply is critical to our nation's energy security, geographically unstable regions of the world. Development of additional resources of North American energy will create and preserve thousands of jobs, strongly benefit our energy security and our nation's economy. The question is do we say yes to oil sands, or do we continue our exposure and dependence on unstable oil markets? The more we can increase our oil supply, the better off we will be. Having Canada as a supplier for our oil is much more comforting than to have other countries supply that oil. Canada has made it clear that they will proceed with oil sand development regardless of the American decision. If the United States does not want the oil, other countries certainly do. It's time the United States seized an opportunity to enhance our energy security. Sure, some folks will need to give up some of their land and put up with the inconvenience of building a pipeline. That inconvenience is no interstate highways were built across this state and this country. I can only imagine where we would be if we had resisted that construction. For the foreseeable future the world economy and our own will continue to run on fossil fuels. Like it or not, we can not do without oil. Increasing the supply of oil will drive down energy prices and benefit everyone, not only South Dakotans. The immediate economic benefit to South Dakota is obvious, just as the long term benefit to the nation is just as obvious. When the Board of Directors of the South Dakota Trucking Association had their discussion to decide whether or not to provide supporting testimony regarding this construction, several issues were discussed. We talked about environmental safety, included that the U.S. Department of State has done it's due diligence and found it to be very safe. We talked about jobs created, the creation, and concluded this project meets job creation needs for this region and for this country in a time when We talked about energy needs and our dependence on unstable countries supplying those needs. We talked about the economic impact that this project will bring to the state of South Dakota, this region and the United States. After that lengthy discussion, the South Dakota Trucking Association Board unanimously agreed that this is a no-brainer decision. The construction of the Keystone XL Pipeline must go forward. Thank you for your time.    
MR. STEELE: Thank you. I'd like to call now number 21, Mr. Brian Aske; 22, Mr Scott Besler; 23, I think is Mr. Olan Wagner and 24, Mr. Wayne Pederson.  
MR. ASKE: Thank you. As stated today already, this is a huge step in getting us away from foreign oil. My name is Brian Aske. I'm the apprenticeship coordinator with the Operating Engineers, Local 49. This also puts America back to work in helping but last, but not least, this pipeline will be built by a union workforce, with the safety, skill and experience that we believe is second to none in the world. Thank you.    
MR. BESLER: Hello, I'm Scott Besler. I'm a rancher, landowner up in Harding County. Thank you for this opportunity to express my views on the proposed TransCanada Keystone XL Pipeline Project. First off, for better or worse, we are inexplicably linked to oil and gas in this country. Each and every day, we directly or indirectly use petroleum or a byproduct thereof. We need it in the gas or diesel to burn in our autos, the plastics we use, the clothes we wear, the food we eat, et cetera. I point this out not to push petroleum, but emphasize how it has permeated every facet of our lives and continues to do so for the foreseeable future. I am a proponent of our country's continued pursuit of cleaner and more environmentally sound 51 sources of energy. However, that is a long term goal and one that realistically isn't going to happen or replace our dependence on fossil fuels in the near future. Most Americans, myself included, would also agree we should increase our domestic production to reduce our dependence on foreign oil. This is a great idea, but there again, given our current level of usage and the projections of future use, we will likely never be completely self sufficient, as far as oil is concerned. We currently import over half of our crude oil, with a substantial proportion coming from countries that are not our closest allies, if allies at all. The only reason that some of these countries sell us oil is because we have the money and for no other reason. They would quickly shut us off if they had a better buyer. Canada, on the other hand, is our single largest foreign oil supplier and arguably our closest ally in many ways. We share the longest nonmilitary guarded border in the world with them. Why wouldn't we want to enhance an already good 52 relationship by agreeing to build this pipeline and bring tar sand oils to our refineries? Those oils are going to go somewhere, it only makes sense for that place to be the U.S.A., where it will provide another reliable source of crude for our refineries. What other benefits would building this pipeline bring? Well, at a time when many are looking for good jobs, this project will bring numerous construction jobs as well as many permanent positions. There will also be thousands of spinoff jobs associated with oil production: service companies and refining jobs to mention a few. The direct and indirect tax revenue generated down the road by this pipeline will help to maintain our roads, schools and other infrastructures. The electricity usage for the pumping stations will help our rural electrics keep their wholesale electric rates down, and that will translate to stable kilowatt rates for the average consumer. They will build large transmission lines to serve the pump stations, which will update and operate our transmission line infrastructure, reducing the chance of large scale outages. Are there risks to this pipeline? Of course there are. However, that can be said about every energy supply there is. I am a firm believer in making sure that every I is dotted and every T is crossed and every reasonable precaution taken to secure the safety of this pipeline and the protection of our land, if the project goes forward. I would encourage landowners, local and state officials and federal officials to be diligent to ensure that proper safeguards are in place. After all, that is smart business and would be in the best interest of everyone. However, with that said, I believe the pertinent question today is does the potential for gain outweigh the risk? In my opinion, what we have to gain with TransCanada Keystone Pipeline greatly outweighs the risks. Being diligent in safeguarding our land does not mean stopping this pipeline, it does mean being smart and using good, sound science and not stymying the project with unrealistic expectations and overbearing regulations. I encourage the State Department and President Obama to give TransCanada the presidential permit it needs to proceed with the project. It would be good for Harding County, South Dakota and the country as a whole. Thank you.    
MR. WAGNER: My name is Dean Wagner. I'm the commissioner from Harding County. I'm speaking on behalf of the county commissioners of Harding County. I was born and raised in the state of South Dakota and spent all my life there, and I ranch in Harding County. This pipeline will cross approximately 70 miles of Harding County. It will be a great benefit in the taxes for the county, as far as the school and our infrastructure. It will be of benefit for the state and the nation. The jobs created will be good for our nation. Economic development will be good. It is the best and safest way to transport our oil that I know of. It not only brings tar sand oil, but it will also open development in our state's northern states, which is badly needed. And it also comes from a friendly country. So, we support the Keystone XL Project within the county of Harding County. Thank you, sir.    
MR. PEDERSON: Mr. Steele, thank you very much for providing this forum. My name is Wayne Pederson. I work for Local 49 Operating Engineers' Training Center. I am one of the people that trains the people that will do this work. When I started in this business in 1968, the people that I work with told me that this business or the infrastructure was 15 years behind the times. Forty three years later, we are at least that far behind the times, if not more. So, we encourage you to build this. The other thing that it will obviously do is provide more jobs, plus trickle down economics for South Dakota. So, I encourage you to build this through South Dakota. One other last comment that I would like to have is that there is no better projects built than union built projects. Thank you very much.   
Mr. STEELE: I'd like to call, please, Mr. Doug Zila, Mr. Gerald Jackson, Mr. Steve Shew and Mr. Jason George, please.  
MR. ZILA: Hi, my name is Doug Zila and I'm part of four generations of operating engineers. I've had the good fortune of being a part of a long line of family heavy equipment operators and heavy equipment mechanics. My two sons are professional, highly skilled, highly trained in operational land environmental protection and sensitivity of pipeline transportation right of way. My boys and thousands of other highly skilled, trained craftsmen have spent countless training hours on the environmental sensitivity of professional craftwork they perform. I strongly urge you to put these skilled craftsmen to work, so they are able to support their families and the communities they live in. Thank you.    
MR. JACKSON: Hello, I'm Gerry Jackson. I'm a member of United Association of Plumbers and Steamfitters, Local 434, Central and Western Wisconsin. I speak in support of the pipeline. We need jobs. I witnessed, personally, the effects on the local businesses from the construction workforce, a pipeline that came through Wisconsin called the Guardian Pipeline. And I also seen a lot of local people get into the construction unions for that project. I saw people's home situations improve through family supporting jobs that came into the area, and I also feel we need to - - let's get our energy from our good neighbors to the north, who are very stable. I mean - - with the wars and stuff protecting our sources of oil in the Middle East, it's just killing us. We've got to get as much as we can; we need to get our energy from reliable, friendly resources. So, thank you.    
MR. SHEW: My name is Steve Shew. I'm a member of UA Local 400, Plumbers and Steamfitters. I'm here today to speak in support of the XL Keystone Pipeline. This piperine means jobs, good paying, middle class family supporting jobs. As these workers work on these jobs, the money they earn is going to turn over in the economy many, many times. Taxes are going to be paid. Roads are going to be built. Schools are going to be built. Local and regional businesses are going to be supported. College funds for kids are going to be contributed to. Family retirement accounts are going to be contributed to. This is going to allow families, middle class families, to again maybe, get to the American dream, right? That's what it's all about. This country right now needs jobs. They need these type of jobs, good paying, family supporting, jobs. That's what it's all about. There's many reasons to build this pipeline, but right now, jobs is foremost in this country. And I think it's high time we get going and get this thing built. Thank you.    
MR. GEORGE: Hello, thank you, my name is Jason George with the Operating Engineers, Local 49. You know, I think the economic benefits of this pipeline are undeniable. I think you've heard a lot about it. Businesses are going to benefit from this, there is no doubt. The state and local economies are going to benefit from this. There is no doubt. The tax revenues are going to increase. There is no doubt. But I want to talk to you about jobs. You're going to hear a lot about jobs in this hearing. And I think people in Washington D.C. need to hear more about jobs. There's 100 or 200 workers in this room. Every one of them has experienced chronic underemployment the last couple of years, or they know somebody who has. When we say we need those jobs, we mean it. And we hear a lot of talk out of D.C. and a lot of talk everywhere from politicians about jobs, jobs, jobs. It's time we started seeing some action. These are 20,000 good paying, family raising jobs that can happen right now. We can do this safely. It can benefit everyone. We implore you, the Secretary of State, President Obama, to do something and approve this project. Thank you.    
MR. STEELE: I'd like to call please, number 30, Mr. Dale Powalait; number 31, Mr. Jeff Gurske, number 32, Mr. Tom Gasperetti and number 33, Mr. Paul Marquardt, please.  
MR. POWALAIT: Good afternoon, my name is Dale Powalait, and I'm employed by the Wisconsin Pipe Trade Association. I'm also president of Steamfitters UA Local 601 in Milwaukee, Wisconsin. Local 601 has pipeline jurisdiction throughout the state of Wisconsin, and pipelines have proven to be a safe, reliable and economical way to transport oil and gas throughout North America and the state of Wisconsin. This project will provide thousands of good paying jobs and give the United States a stable supply of oil and help end our dependence on middle eastern oil. These are just a few of the reasons that I strongly support the Keystone XL Project. Thank you. 22    
MR. GURSKE: My name is Jeff Gurske. I'm with the United Association, Local 11, Duluth, Minnesota. I'm here to support the Keystone Project. I think we've heard several things: the benefits, the tax benefits, the jobs. Of course, we need the jobs. And one thing, we are all stewards of the land. If this project doesn't go through and it ends up getting shipped overseas and processed, they don't have the environmental laws there that we have in this country. And eventually, it's in the environment, in the air and ends up in the great lakes, or any lakes. So hopefully, you'll keep that in mind, and once again, I would just like to encourage President Obama to approve this project. Thank you.    
MR. GASPERETTI: Good afternoon, my name is Tom Gasperetti. I'm an employee of the Wisconsin Pipe Trades and a member of the United Association of Local 75, out of Milwaukee, Wisconsin. I'm here today to support the Keystone XL 22 Pipeline. Our nation's economy has been struggling for far too long and the construction industry has been bit particularly hard. Workers and their families are struggling, and this project will get us back on our feet and fuel this country's economy. This project is ready to be built. It's funded, and it's the right thing to do. Please support this project. It's right for American business, and it's right for the American population. Thank you.    
MR. MARQUARDT: Hello, my name is Paul Marquardt. I'm with the United Association of Plumbers and Pipefitters. We're the guys that weld the pipe. It's in our best interest and Keystone's best interest - - we have x-ray welds; we're using extra heavy pipe. It's in our best interest to make sure that this pipeline is safe, and it's put in right. I've had two of them go by my house, gas pipelines. Of course, I only own one acre, but it where it was. We're going to try and do it as safely as humanly possible because it's in everybody's best interest to do that. National security-wise, instead of getting our oil from the Middle East, where we have to send our kids over there to get shot at. I don't think we're going to get invaded by Canada anytime soon. It's all going to go to market. And the thing is we're either going to be buying it back from the Chinese, because the pipeline is either going to be coming down here or it's going out west, and then it's going to go over to China, Indonesia. It's going to get refined, and we're going to buy it back that way. So, let's create some jobs here.    
MR. STEELE: I'd like to call please, Mr Joe Moenck, Mr. Tom Wilson, Mr. Leon Schochenmaier and Mr. Ron Slaba, please.  
MR. MOENCK: Thank you. My name is Joe Moenck, and I'm an employee of the Minnesota Pipe Association of Local 6 in Rochester, Minnesota. Over the past few years, our members have seen some tough times: high unemployment and wage and benefit cuts and quite simply, just a lack of work. But through these rough times for our members, I guarantee you they understand one thing. If they don't do their work, somebody else will do it for them. The Keystone Project, it sends the same message to us. If we don't embrace this project, the Canadian oil will still get to refineries some way. Like I heard somebody say earlier, that product will still make it to the market. To outsource over seven billion dollars worth of construction jobs in this country's economic times is not needed. U.S. workers are ready for this project. The Minnesota Pipe trades and UA Local 6 supports this project, and we ask that you do the same. Thank you.    
MR. WILSON: Hello, my name is Tom Wilson. also have a proposed mancamp on my ranch. In 2009, we had a government jobs stimulus package that created 1.5 million jobs. It cost 575,000 dollars a job. In 2011, we have another government job stimulus package. Why are we worried about government job stimulus packages, when we have a private job stimulus package that's going to cost seven billion dollars of private money? Not my money, no one in the united States will spend this money. It's private money. This private jobs stimulus package will create 20,000 jobs directly related to the pipeline, 118,000 spinoff jobs, inject over 20 billion dollars into the U.S. economy and inject 6.5 billion dollars into personal economy. It will create 585 million dollars of money that will go into state and local tax bases. It will also create an infrastructure to allow wind power to be established by the use of looping the transmission lines. The U.S. uses 50 million 21 barrels of oil a day. We import 11 million barrels of oil a day. Over the summer, the Department of Energy Secretary Steven Chu said, "Having Canada as a supplier of our oil is much more comforting than to have other companies supply our oil." That got me to thinking. Why are we importing oil from countries that are attacking us with terrorism? When was the last time Canada attacked us with terrorism? Never, they never have. We've never had to send our boys to Canada to fight. You can look around this room, and I'll bet you everyone knows someone who has been across the water fighting. We don't want that. We want our boys here. There's 65,000 barrels of Bakken oil committed to come down the TransCanada XL pipeline. That's U.S. oil with 240 drilling rigs in North Dakota right now operating. That's eight new wells a day. The Bakken Oil Field can use the pipeline. We need it. It will increase oil industry in South Dakota, North Dakota and Montana. Last night on the internet, there were 3,000 21 jobs available in North Dakota, oil jobs. If we can increase that in South Dakota and Montana, look at the jobs that will be available, long term jobs. I can't figure out why we are fighting this pipeline. It doesn't make any sense. Instead of fighting it, we ought to ask them, "Let's build two of them." Thank you.    
MR. SCHOCHENMAIER: My name is Leon Schochenmaier. I'm the city administrator for the city of Pierre, and I'm here on behalf Mayor Laurie Gill. "As mayor of the city, I am concerned about our long term energy needs in our community and how the availability of reliable and affordable fuel to power our city vehicles, construction equipment and heating needs will affect our community. I am also concerned that reliable and affordable fuel for our citizens and businesses is especially important to this city of Pierre, due to our location and access to business, health care and materials that are not available in Pierre. 21 Connections to larger cities that have these services and supplies are often more than 150 miles from Pierre. This requires a substantial investment in travel for our citizens. Consequently, we have concerns whenever energy costs escalate. We believe the proposed Keystone XL Pipeline provides another source of reliable energy for our community. We therefore support the continued development of this important energy project. However, we also recognize the challenges to construct and maintain this pipeline in an environmentally responsible manner. As mayor of the city of Pierre, South Dakota, I support the continued development of the Keystone XL Pipeline and urge that the owners of this pipeline take all reasonable measures to assure its long term environmental safety. Mayor Laurie Gill, mayor of Pierre."    
MR. SLABA: Hello, my name is Ron Slaba. I am the president of the Harding County School We live in an area with miles of pipeline and a full fledged oil industry that's been in place for decades. With that, we know how to deal with pipelines. We know how to deal with oil country. As a school board, we are standing here asking your approval of this pipeline. This pipeline will dramatically change the tax income we need to educate our children: our best and most valuable resource. As funding dollars decline from all other money sources, we have literally had to cut our educational system below basic levels. This pipeline and the general fund taxes, the capital outlay taxes and the gross receipt taxes it will generate will allow us to educate our children to a level that they deserve. As everyone knows, the better educated our children are the more a productive part of society they will become. In our opinion, the education of our children is the most important cornerstone in our national security. This pipeline will allow us to keep that we would ask you to support and approve this pipeline. Thank you.    
MR. STEELE: Next, I have, please, Mr. Richard Klein, Mr. Ray Anderson and Mr. Chuck Noble.  
MR. KLEIN: Thank you, Mr. Steele. My name is Richard Klein. I live in Woodbury, Minnesota. I am employed by the Minnesota Pipe Trades and a member of the United Association and a United States Citizen. I would like to speak in favor of the Kingston   XL Pipeline. I believe that our children and their children have a right to live in a world not relying on foreign oil. I also believe that this will give our country a lift in reducing unemployment and creating jobs. I know that building this with skilled men and women of the building trades and the United Association would be done professionally and safely for all interested parties with limited changes to our environment. We have the training and the manpower to 20 complete this in a timely manner with our trade people ready to go to work tomorrow for the future of our country. Thank you.    
MR. ANDERSON: I'm Ray Anderson from Harding County. I'm involved with the pipeline in numerous ways. It will go across my land. I'm a county commissioner, Harding County Commissioner, and I've also been a director of Grant Electric for 31 years as treasurer. On behalf of Grant Electric Cooperative, "I'm writing in support of the Keystone XL Pipeline, to urge you to grant the presidential permit that is required for construction of this important project. Grant Electric Cooperative Incorporation strongly believes that the Keystone XL is in our country's national interest because it will improve our national security, provide a long term stable energy supply to the United States, create jobs, and spur growth. And the pipeline will provide more than 700,000 barrels of oil each day from the Dakotas, Montana, Oklahoma and Alberta, Canada to refineries along the Texas Gulf Coast 20 reducing our dependency on oil imports from unreliable sources. By supporting domestic production and importing oil from our ally, Canada, instead of politically unstable countries, we will strengthen both our national security and energy security. The project also will drive incredible economic growth in the United States. The pipeline is expected to create nearly 20,000 manufacturing and construction jobs in the United States, as well as provide more than 5.2 billion in tax revenue to the Keystone XL corridor states. Further, Grant Electric Incorporation believes that the Department of State has thoroughly analyzed the project's environmental impact and that the final EIS properly concludes that there are no substantial environmental concerns that should prohibit this project from moving forward. Keystone XL will be constructed using industry best practices and will meet and exceed all existing pipeline regulatory standards. Grant Electric 19 Cooperative believes that the construction of the Keystone XL Pipeline is in the best interest of all Americans, and we respectfully request that the Department of State approve the project and grant TransCanada the presidential permit necessary to begin the pipeline." Thank you.   
Mr. NOBLE: My name is Chuck Noble. I'm here as a business man and friends, like you, on this matter. I am for developing oil and refineries in the northern region. I am against pumping this oil to Texas. I don't believe this project is about tar sands oil and a 36 inch pipe. I believe, in the long view, there will be multiple pipes, if this is allowed, going south with not just tar sands oil, North Dakota oil, water, electricity, not to the benefit of the northern region. We would create a lot of jobs if this oil in North Dakota and Montana, South Dakota, if that oil was refined and processed in the northern region. We would get far a bigger impact, positively, on the region with jobs and our 19 economy than shipping this oil south. It's going to cost us a lot of electricity to pump this oil south, 1,500 miles. Our utilities will be using a lot of low cost electricity into those pumps, which will, in the end, raise our electric utility rates substantially, which is a negative impact on our economy. We will easily, probably, exceed doubling our electrical rates, just to provided electricity to pump this oil south. And it will only get worse if they put in more and more pipes sucking this resource out of our region to the south. And I don't believe this tar sands oil is really going to be processed in Texas. I believe it's going on ships to China. Canada can ship this oil west to the west coast to China to export it, and that would be a good thing for the world. China needs oil too, but we don't need to trek this oil across our states using up our valuable electrical energy, pumping this oil south for what purpose? We can save a lot of energy here by just moving it several hundred miles east/west instead of south, 19 1, miles. Thank you very much.    
MR. STEELE: I'd like to call next please, speaker number 41, Mr. Mark Johnson; 42, Mr. Robert Johnson; 43, Mr. Bernie Rossanen and number 44, Mr. Lee Weidner, please.  
MR. JOHNSON: I'm Mark Johnson with Local 49, Operator Engineer. I just think we have a wonderful opportunity here to buy oil from a friend instead of enemies. Thank you very much.    
MR. JOHNSON: Boy, that was quick. I'm Robert Johnson. I'm a Harding County Commissioner, and also I'm chairman of the State Association of County Commissioners. And I'm here in support of the Keystone Pipeline. Some of the things that it will do for the counties is a tax base that it will create. It will help spread out our taxes for our citizens, give them more money in their pocket to spend for all the things we do and help create jobs in our own 19 communities and stuff like that. Oil is the lifeblood of America. It keeps us moving. You heard the Trucking Association guy talk about how it moves our products all across the country. That's one of the most important things that we can have, is to get those things moved. Along with moving of products and the taxes, it's going to make strong economies and strong state governments. And that's all in our national interest, when everything is strong. You heard from our school president from Harding County, how it would help educate our kids, who, I agree with him, are one of our most important national interests. This pipeline is going to be safe. I sat at the PUC hearings and heard them talk about all the safety features that are going to be on this line. I couldn't hardly believe that they could do all the things that they are going to do. That's not saying there won't be a leak. There probably could be. I don't think it will be anything that is going to be 18 significant, if it is. But I know these guys, these unions, these pipe guys. They're not going to build a pipeline that leaks. They're going to build one that pumps oil. And I think that we need to get 22 behind this, make sure that it gets built, and that we support all the people that are here doing it. There's a lot more things that I could say about this, but all the people have already said it, and I don't think we should be redundant and just keep going over it. But I do have one thing that was sent to me this morning from the Fall River Commission. From Mike Horner, the chairman of the Fall River Commission, and he wanted me to read this. "The five commissioners of the Fall River County South Dakota Commission unanimously wish to express their unqualified support for the proposed pipeline across South Dakota. We strongly believe that, with the existing federal and state regulations, this vital economic resource development should and must be approved. Respectfully, Chairman Mike Ortner." 18 I guess I hope that the State Department will approve this project in a timely manner, so that Keystone XL can get busy and build this pipeline, and make South Dakota stronger, our nation stronger, 22 thank you.    
MR. RISSANEN: Hi, my name is Bernie Rissanen. I'm a member of Pipefitters Local 539, Minneapolis, Minnesota. I've been a welding instructor for 14 years for our local. We've got a brand new training center, as well as a lot of these other local unions. We highly train our apprentices and our journeymen to this type of work. We've done this forever. We have new pipe, new technology, new welding equipment. This is not nothing that has ever not been done before. In 1968, where I grew up in Minnesota, they ran a pipeline through there. Were there risks with that? Yes, there were. But the hundreds and hundreds of people that were employed in those small towns far outweighed those risks for the economy, to 18 boost the economy for those people. Are there risks for this pipeline? Yes, there are. There's risk for everything. There's risk for everything we do all day long. Just getting up is a 22 risk. The biggest risk we face here is not doing this and facing higher foreclosure rates, higher unemployment rates. We need these jobs, and we need these jobs now. If we don't do this, it would be a shame. This is something that's been done before. It will be done again, and we need to look at this. And we need to look at this hard and to say that we need these jobs for our people, and we need this because we have good Canadian neighbors and this pipe will be run somewhere. This oil will be shipped somewhere. It needs to be put in the ground in pipe and done properly. Thank you very much.    
MR. WEIDNER: Hello, I'm Lee Weidner from Trip County, South Dakota. We're clear on the southern end, just before the project crosses into Nebraska. I'm a farmer, rancher, and this project I rise in support of this project. We're going to need oil for many, many years. As a farmer, I was thinking on the way up here, I'll bet the of a lot of other things too, is probably close to 30 years old. The equipment we're building today is going to be in use for at least another 30 or 40 years. And we need to keep building toward being self supporting. Our country needs to develop oil sources that we can depend on, and Canada has been a friend that we can always depend on. And we can be sure that this product is somehow going to be moved to refineries as has been said. In my mind, a pipeline is certainly the most common sense way of moving it safely and economically and not just tearing up our roads and all the other things that are going to come with highway transportation or railroad. Oil is going to continue to cost money. This project will keep more of the dollars in our economy, and I guess one of the things that I like 17 about it is that it is privately funded and not being taken out of our paychecks, whatever they might be. Tax revenue from this project will be a real 21 help to our local governments, especially our schools. As an individual farmer, it seems to me that supporting this project is the least I can do. And maybe on the other hand, it's the most I can do. Thank you.    
MR. STEELE: I'd like to call please, Mr. Tim Mackey, Mr. Rodger Common, Mr. Steve Corthas and Ben Dye.  
MR. MACKEY: My name is Tim Mackey. I'm from Woodbury, Minnesota. I'm a proud member of Laborers' International Union of North America and privileged to be the business manager of Local 563 in Minneapolis. It covers parts of Minnesota and the state of North Dakota. The Keystone XL Project will create 20,000 jobs in construction and manufacturing at a time when the industry really needs the boost. The current 17 unemployment rate in construction is almost 14 percent. For much of the last two years, the industry has had unemployment levels over 20 percent. The unemployment rate in construction 21 reached over percent in February of 2010, depression era levels. This project is really essential for jobs. This project will go a long way in putting equipment operators, pipefitters, laborers and truck drivers on the job. After three years in the permitting process, it's time to approve the project and allow construction contractors to hire thousands of our friends and neighbors to work on it. The jobs created will be good jobs, with good benefits not low wage jobs. These are exactly the kind of private investments that we need to get the economy moving again. Please find the Keystone XL Project in the national interest and approve the presidential permit right away. I appreciate the State very much.    
MR. COMMON: I'm Rodger Common. I'm with need the jobs. Thank you.    
MR. DYE: My name is Ben Dye. I'm an officer with Pipefitters Local 539. I'm here today to join the school officials, the merchants, the labor leaders, the ranchers, the county officials, the state officials that have all spoke before me and spoke in favor of this. This is the right thing to do. We need the jobs. We need the oil. We need the independence. We need to move forward. Thank you for your time.    
MR. STEELE: Is Mr. Steve Corthas here? Okay, then we'll move along. I'd like to call Mr. Jim Berger, Mr. Dennis O'Connor, I believe, Mr. Jeff Manson, and Mr. Cary Bryson, please.  
MR. O'Connor. My name is Dennis O'Connor. 16 I'm an American, a veteran, and I support this project.    
MR. STEELE: Is Jim Berger here please? 20 How about Jeff Manson? Cary Bryson? Okay, we'll move along. Mr. Loren, I believe, Prange? Mr. George Frederikson, Mr. Mike Bubalo, and Mr. Mike Connelly.  
MR. PRANGE: Hi, good afternoon, Loren Prange. As a former resident born and raised in South Dakota, I support the Keystone XL Pipeline because of the economic benefit it will bring to the state of South Dakota. We are here today to speak in favor of the Keystone XL Pipeline. The State Department should approve this project because it will strengthen our national economic security. Thank you.    
MR. STEELE: Do we have George Frederikson? Mike Bubalo? Mike Connelly, please? Then I have number 57, Mark Borowicz; 58, Mr. Logan Dockter; 59, Mr. Doug Jarek and 60, I think Ms. 16 Armida Alexander.  
MR. BOROWICZ: My name is Mark Borowicz. I'm a member of Laborers Local 563, Minnesota/North Dakota, and I'm here today to support the Keystone 20 XL Pipeline. It will create thousands of jobs. Jobs with good pay and good benefits, and at this time, I believe the economy and the industry could use them. So, I ask the State Department to approve the Keystone XL Pipeline. Thank you.    
MR. DOCKTER: Thank you for allowing me to speak. My name is Logan Dockter. I am the business manager for the Plumbers and Pipefitters  UA Local 300 for the states of North Dakota and South Dakota. Both my members and myself want to go on record as supporting this very important project. To my members, it means badly needed jobs. To the United States, it means helping shore up our weak economy for an untold number or years and for securing a reliable source of energy from a stable country, which our country desperately needs. 16 We so need this project built. We need it built and designed environmentally sound, utilizing the newest and safest engineering that's available. Thank you. 20   
MR. JAREK: My name is Doug Jarek. I'm a member of the Local 563, 35 year member. And I'm here to support the project to get young men and women, skilled men and women, to work. Thank you.    
MS. ALEXANDER: My name is Armida Alexander. I serve the members of the Unitarian Universalist Church, All Souls, in Sioux Falls, South Dakota. I am their minister. I was ordained 30 years ago. I am here with the encouragement and blessing of my congregation and their denomination. I come to speak to the dilemma of the tar sands pipeline. We have deliberated and are ready to reveal our hearts to you. We know that there are many opinions about the wisdom of allowing the pipeline to run through 16 Dakota territory and the wisdom of building it at all. As Edwin Newman famously remarked, "When two people think exactly alike, one is not thinking very much." 20 We are aware that those who stand to gain money or prestige from the business of transporting toxic material will use very fancy rhetoric to describe its advantages. They will use sublime language aimed precisely at what many people need and want: Progress, energy, jobs and independence from foreign entanglements. Others will say progress has its hidden costs. Businesses always try to externalize these costs, but someone will pay, usually those least able to afford it. These costs will not be privately endowed. An energy is a form of spirit and as such it is dangerous to handle, to extract and to transport. The ancient storytellers told us this. Prometheus was chained to a rock and his liver was extracted daily. Jobs, work is very important and everyone is in favor of jobs. Foreign oil had entangled us in 16 international intrigues and wars and they are lamentable. Well, we are those others, saying these things. We oppose the pipeline. It is the duty of religion 20 to judge from the highest possible ethical standpoint, from the standpoint of what we hold sacred, what is Wakon.  In these crucially important decisions, the State Department will be called upon to raise your eyes to the horizon, to be in traditional new testament language, "Wise as serpents and gentle as doves." That is like a serpent, close to the earth; and like a dove, soaring above. The integrity of the earth and the health of its people and animals is in your hands. Francis David once said, "We need not think alike to love alike." Our love runs deep for this land, these people and the spirit that troubled the waters to bring them forth. This love we leave with you in your decision making, to counsel you in wisdom. May it be so.   16 
MR. STEELE: Next, I have please, Mr. James Wheelock, Mr. Lee Hiller, Mr. John Logelin and Mr. Jason Edelman, please.  
MR. WHEELOCK: I'm Jim Wheelock, with 20 Local 563. And I support the Keystone Project. Our middle class in America is all but disappearing, and we need these jobs. Thank you.    
MR. HILLER: Good afternoon, my name is Lee Hiller. I'm from Good Thunder, Minnesota. I'm the president of the International Union of Operator Engineers, Local Number 49. I help represent over 13,000 highly trained and skilled heavy equipment operators and public sector employees from South Dakota, North Dakota and Minnesota. Our members and their families have proudly served and are currently serving in our military today, putting their lives on the line to keep our country free. Face it, these wars and conflicts where our brothers and sisters are proudly serving have mostly started over the need and control of oil. 16 Canadian and American oil drilled and shipped to our American pipelines could possibly help end the need to deploy our troops in hostile areas of the world and bring our troops home. 20 The operating engineers stand ready to construct this line today, and I ask the State Department to approve this project. Thank you.    
MR. EDELMAN: My name is Jason Edelman, I'm a member of the 139 Operator Engineers out of Wisconsin. I am a resident of the state of South Dakota. I support the pipeline. I support it for jobs. As a personal pipeline worker, about 25 percent of my income went back into the local community while I was over the road. I support it because of all the stuff that you go to buy in the store, a lot of it is made out of plastic, not just fuel. And I support it, based on the Constitution, that the first sentence of the Constitution is, "We the people for the United States, of the people of the United States." This people as a whole. Thank you.    
MR. STEELE: Is John Logelin here please? Mr. Brian Brunette, and Mr. David Owen, please.  
MR. BRUNETTE: Good afternoon. I would first like to say thank you for giving me the opportunity to speak here today. My name is Brian Brunette. I'm from Mendota Heights, Minnesota. I'm a proud member of the Laborers' Union of North America, and I would just like to say that there's not a whole lot of things that I can say that haven't been said already. But this is an opportunity. This is an opportunity for our country that our forefathers and mothers, they fought for this. This is our opportunity to better our country and our society. So I ask for this to be approved, the Keystone Project. Thank you.    
MR. ATKINSON: Thank you for this 33 year member. I just want to say I'd like to see this project go and go fast. I will have been a member for 33 to me a year or two ago, and I had some financial decisions to make. Fortunately, I had an opportunity I did not want to take, but I took; I retired. I would have liked to have worked a few more years, but the work wasn't there. So I hope this passes fast, so the people in my situation can make the right decision. Thank you.    
MR. OWEN: Thank you, hearing officer. David Owen, South Dakota Chamber of Commerce and Industry. It seems like the main question before you is whether this pipeline should cross that border. We would enthusiastically say yes. There are several other questions. Should we buy oil from our best friends from the north? We think we should. I suppose one could look at the 15 question about whether they should be developing this oil, but that seems to me to be beyond the stretch of this hearing and beyond a question that we can answer. That is for Canada to decide. I 19 suspect they will do that, regardless of whether they put it in this pipeline or put it in another one. Should we transport this oil in pipelines? I would say yes, and suggest that the fact that there are hundreds of pipelines crossing virtually every part of this country, and that the issues that they have are few and far between would give testament to the fact that, that can be a very sound decision. We support this for the construction jobs, and for South Dakota, probably most importantly, for the fact that this adds to a tax base for schools in very rural areas that need it desperately. My final observation is this. When you can see labor and government groups and business and ag groups, rural, all banding together, you're not just looking at a good economic proposal, you're looking at a near miracle. Thank you. 15   
MR. STEELE: Is Karen Logan here? Okay, then I will call please Mr. Dan McGawen, Mr. Kenneth Bartz, Stacey Karels and Josh Bussan please. 19  
MR. BARTZ Well, I guess I'm going first. I thank you for letting me talk to you. I'm a retired 132 Local member, Saint Paul. I support this pipeline because of we need the jobs here in the United States. We need the oil. The pipeline runs 24/7. It brings in a lot of oil at one time for a long period of time. It would take a lot of ships to bring that much oil in. It would take a lot of trains to cross this country to bring that oil in. And some more economical threat with the trains bringing oil across, because of construction, road hazards, whatever. And we need the oil, so why not just let us build a pipeline and take and use the oil here in the United States, instead of imported oil, and take and have our refineries refine it. Bring down taxes that comes out of it, the United States will benefit from it. We are already using electricity and stuff from Canada, which is going good. We are getting oil that stuff going bad across the nation. Why not with this here pipeline? Because it brings just that much more opportunity to bring the economy up, and the taxes that it will bring in will be good. I appreciate the capability of talking to you, and I hope you approve this pipeline. Thank you.    
MR. STEELE: Excuse me, you are Stacey Karels, is that correct?  
MR. KARELS: That's Ken.  
MR. STEELE: That just finished speaking?  
MR. KARELS: That's Ken Bartz.  
MR. STEELE: Ken Bartz, okay, I'm sorry.  
MR. KARELS: I'm Stacey Karels.  
MR. STEELE: You're Stacey Karels.  
MR. KARELS: Yeah, I'm a member of Laborers International Union, North America. I am Saint Paul, Minnesota in Southwestern Minnesota. I live in Good Thunder, Minnesota, and I support this pipeline for the opportunity, for the always going to be maintenance on this project, it's going to keep our members busy for a long time. And I am also an avid hunter and an outdoorsman. And for me to enjoy that type of stuff, we need the jobs for the money to go enjoy that type of stuff. Nothing is free now-a-days. So, I thank you for your time.    
MR. STEELE: Is Dan McGowen here? Josh Bussey? Then I'll go on please with Ken Lovitz, with Mike Warner, with Todd Pufahl and with James Ungerman.  
MR. LOVITZ: Seventy three, Ken Lovitz. I am a member of Laborers' International, North America. I'm glad to be here today, just to support this pipeline. I've worked on pipelines before. I've also got pipelines in my backyard in Minnesota The point at hand is I want to be a steady middle class American, to live this dream in America. And if I don't see these middle class jobs nothing anymore. I'm glad to be a person that I can support my children in college today. If I didn't have this money to support my children, where would more people with more knowledge be in America any more? So, I want to support this pipeline and have more jobs, a better economy and a little bit of money, so I can enjoy life just a little more. Thank you.   
Mr. WARNER: My name is Mike Warner. I'm a proud member of Laborers' International Union of North America. And simply put, I support this pipeline for two reasons: the thousands of good paying jobs that it's going to create and to reduce the dependency on oil from the Middle East. Thank you for your time.  
MR. PUFAHL: Good afternoon. My name is Todd Pufahl, and I'm a proud 32 year member of the Laborers' International Union of North America. I'm for the Laborers' District Council of Minnesota in North Dakota, where over 23,000 people depend on the wages and benefits afforded them and their families as they work as skilled construction craft laborers. As you have heard many times without dispute, the Keystone XL Pipeline will create over 20,000 jobs in construction and manufacturing, at a time when industry and the economy really needs a boost. The current unemployment rate, in the last two years in our industry, has had unemployment levels over 20 percent. This project is clearly essential for jobs for our industry. This project will go a long way towards putting members back on the job. For that reason, we would urge Secretary of State Clinton and President Obama to please find the Keystone XL Project in the national interest and approve the presidential permit right away. Thank    
MR. STEELE: Is James Ungerman here, please? Ungerman. Thank you for having this. I'm in favor of the Keystone XL Pipeline. We need the work. We need it bad. There are a lot of people with no work. We need to decrease our dependence from  OPEC and South America. We've got to get our country back. We need the jobs. Thank you.    
MR. STEELE: I'd like to call please number 77, Mr. Steve Trepanier; 78, Mr. Tom Pender; 79, Mr. Steve Buck and 80, is it Brice Bowlos, please?  
MR. TREPANIER: My name is Steve Trepanier. I'm a member of the Laborers' Union of Minnesota/North Dakota. I stand here in favor of this pipeline. We have hundreds of skilled construction pipeline. We need the jobs. Let's build it.    
MR. PENDER: Good afternoon, Mr. Steele. from under the shadows of the Washington Monument. It's kind of nice to see the rest of the country once in a while, isn't it? My name is Tom Pender. I'm a 41 year member of the Laborers' International Union, and a retired member of Local 563. I reside in Mission, Texas for the winter, and I am a native and summer resident of Minnesota. I'm about to make my annual migration south, and I'm going to be burning about 300 gallons of gas to get there, pulling my house. And I've got a little different spin on this. It would be real different to like buying the gas from North America, rather than buying 300 gallons of OPEC oil. I know it's more barrels for them to import. But it would be just a real, feel good thing to buy domestically produced gas from our own continent. 14 There is a group of people that are protesting everything. They protest fishing, don't know why. They protest logging, well, I don't know what they build their house with or wipe their hiney with when 18 they get done doing their business. But there's a lot of people that are just against everything, and I'm not understanding why. We'd like to reduce our dependence on OPEC oil, and this is one good way to do it without costing the taxpayers a nickel. Thank you very much. I appreciate you're bringing your hearing here. Thank you.    
MR. BUCK: Good afternoon, my name is Steve Buck. I am a business agent for the Laborers' Local 563 in Minnesota. And you've heard many people talk about jobs, jobs, jobs. Well, I look at it as a little more than a job. The men and women in the construction trades and the people that will be building this pipeline have careers. Those careers provide those people with a fair wage and with benefits; health insurance, 14 pension, that will take care of them into their retirement. These people will not be a burden on society. They will live a very comfortable retirement on their union pensions. 18 This oil exists. It's not a matter of if Canada is going to develop this resource. They are developing this resource. It can either flow to the United States, where it can create many good paying jobs and lessen our dependence on foreign oil, or it can go straight west across Canada to China. The choice is yours. I hope you'll do the right thing. Thank you.    
MR. BOWLES: Hello, my name is Brice Bowles, is how you pronounce it.  
MR. STEELE: Brice.  
MR. BOWLES: Thank you. I'm just proud to be here as a member of North American Laborers' Local, and say I am in support of this XL Pipeline. I think it's going to do good for this country, and for the people that need the jobs. Thank you.  
MR. STEELE: Okay, next I have number 81, Mr. Oscar Sletten; number 82, Mr. Mitchel Nehrenberg; number 83, Jackie Sletten and 84, Ryan  
MR. SLETTEN: Hi, my name is Oscar Sletten. I'm a member of Operating Engineers Local 49. I want to thank you for having this meeting today. Everybody so far has spoke on everything I wanted to, and I just want to say I support the pipeline. Thanks.    
MR. NEHRENBERG: Hi, my name is Mitchell Nehrenberg. I'm with the Laborers' Local 563, Minneapolis, Minnesota. I want to say I support this pipeline. It's not always about construction. It's about our future, our young kids. I have two young kids that will benefit from this project also. So everybody, look around. I guess Tom had mentioned about the toilet paper and the 2 by 4s, but take a look how you got here. How did you drive here? Just    
MS. SLETTEN: My name is Jackie Sletten. I'm from Owatonna, Minnesota, and I support the Thank you.    
MR. FIELD: Hi, my name is Ryan Field. I am a member of Local 455, and I'm here to support the pipeline. Over the last few years with the high unemployment rate, I'd hate to see an opportunity pass by that could create 20,000 plus jobs. In addition, the more oil we buy from the Middle East, the more we're strengthening their economies and their infrastructure, and they don't even like us. We can bring that money in dollars here, and do it ourselves. Plus all the extra money that's generated from the tax revenue, helps lessen the burden on the people of the areas that it's built. On top of that, even the people who are opposed to it chartered a bus that came here. That runs on    
MR. STEELE: Next, I have Mr. Walter Wicks, Mr. John Harter, Mr. John Kerstiens and Ms.  
MR. WICKS: I'm Walter Wicks. I'm from Albert Lee, Minnesota. And I've been with the Laborers' Union since 1990. I'm a Vietnam veteran, and as you all know, the country never supported the Vietnam vets. As they are, our soldiers today are lucky that they are being supported. Now, this is something that people need to think about. When our soldiers come home, they need jobs. And this is going to create many jobs throughout, from the northern United States down to the southern United States. This is throughout the country where jobs are needed very badly. And I was going to retire this year, but as the last two years I have had very little work and am unable to retire at this time, and I'm 65. So, that means I've got to work at least two more years before I'm able to retire, if the jobs are there. Minnesota, and as we went through the reservations, we had not only the environmental representatives, we also had representatives of the reservations and everything had to be above board. Now, when we went through the country, many of the sites were in poor conditions and when the pipeline left there, often times they were in much better perspective than what they were. So, we improved the environment that way, not only with the jobs that we are providing for many people in a bad situation in the United States today. We need this pipeline to go through, and I highly recommend everybody support this and think about it. This is something that needs to be done. Thank you.    
MR. HARTER: Thank you for having us. I'm John Harter. I represent family farms and ranches, and I paid my own way here. I ranch in Tripp County, South Dakota. The proposed Keystone XL Pipeline crosses me four miles west of Colome, South TransCanada, a foreign for profit company, has filed eminent domain on my family to steal our property and our property rights from us. The good faith negotiations, with fair being the key word on Keystone 1 and Keystone XL. This was done by TransCanada being allowed the threat of eminent domain as a leverage tool to intimidate property owners into signing easements. Using coercion to get someone to sign an easement is against the law. But when we asked our state and federal government leadership to stop this process, we were ignored. As far as I'm concerned, there are a lot of people that should resign their position for dereliction of duty. Because of TransCanada's ability to use eminent domain, property owners had no right to say no during negotiations. This alone has taken millions of dollars from our local communities and has a negative effect on our economy. When a project that is so large and high risk starts off with a negative public interest, and a poor economy is not in our national interest. My property, four miles west of Colome, South Aquifer. The city of Colome's water wells are on the southwest end of the corridor land being crossed, Section 19776 in Tripp County, with my property being sub-irrigated and having erodable and permeable sandy soil, and being within contamination distance of the city of Colome's water wells, I asked that my property be treated as high consequence area. TransCanada's response was no, this area was not determined to be high consequence area. Let's see, sub-irrigated by part of the largest aquifer in the United States, within contamination distance of a public water resource, I think this is a high risk area and needed to be treated as such. TransCanada likes to brag that they have safe pipelines, that they build the safest pipelines available. Well, they have yet to prove it. my property. My contact at PHMSA will not answer my e-mails now. How responsible is this? I also asked PHMSA for a copy of the report on Keystone 1 maximum diameter. I'm still waiting. What are they hiding? Fourteen leaks on Keystone 1 in just over a year, a new gas pipeline in Wyoming explodes and you ask, trust me? I think not. The endangerment of our water is not in our public interest nor our national interest, and is not and should not be for sale at any price. So many communities are already recycling sewer water to drink or have to filter their water for contaminants. We have some of the purest water in the nation and want to keep it that way. When I was told no to having my land treated as a high consequence area, this should have surprised me, but it did not, coming from a company, TransCanada, in a nation, Canada, that does not even respect its own fresh water resources. 13 The steam injection process is using four to five barrels of water for one barrel of oil. The wastewater from this process is pumped into holding ponds. The water from these ponds is leaking out 17 and flowing into waterways that flow north and dump into the Arctic Ocean. This water is full of highly toxic chemicals. If they are willing to do this to their own country, what makes you think they care what happens to ours? If you are so concerned about national security, you better remember that food and water come first to maintain life, not oil. This is a common sense issue. I hope our leaders will find some and use it. Next, you need to look at clean up of a spill into the Ogallala Aquifer. The answer is TransCanada nor anyone will ever be able to clean up a spill into an aquifer. This alone is enough to deny this project. This water resource is so valuable you can not risk it to the greedy oil investors to make a cheap buck. documents are so full of errors you would think a two year old prepared them. It is worse that TransCanada had an aid in this process. How much in this Keystone Oil Project makes Bernie Madoff look like a saint and is an embarrassment to our state and federal government. Within the SEIS 3-127, TransCanada expects property owners to be its early detection system. This is because the one they are installing will not detect pinhole leaks, which could leak as much as five percent of it's capacity a day, or 1.7 million gallons a day, without being detected. Not only are they admitting that their safety system is not effective, TransCanada wants property owners to work for them for nothing for the next 30 to 50 years. This is after underpaying most, if not all, for the extreme risk to their property.  
MR. STEELE: Mr. Harter, we appreciate your comments, but can you bring them to a close, sir? project, and you guys need to think that our water quality is more important than this oil. Thank you.  
MR. STEELE: Thank you.  
MR. KERSTIENS: I'm John Kerstiens of the South Dakota Farmers' Union. Our main concern with this pipeline is for landowners that are affected by the route of the pipeline. We must assure that each one has the opportunity to have their concerns aired and legitimately alleviated. The landowners must be able to have any legal contract reviewed by their own attorney to assure full knowledge of what is asked for by landowners. Compensation of land should be just and negotiated in the best interest of the landowner. TransCanada should work with the landowners to assure the best route of the pipeline through the land. They need to take into account the waterways, the stock dams, the ponds and the wildlife habitat and water for human use before construction. Our understanding is in the beginning the 12 company did not want to work or negotiate with the landowners. After millions of dollars spent and a couple of years deliberating, TransCanada finally agreed to work with most of the landowners, and we 16 suggest they remember doing that and moving forward. In addition, any spill cleanup is the responsibility of TransCanada. And production losses, as a result of the spill, must be compensated fairly by TransCanada. All affected lands of the pipeline should be reclaimed to native grass species or that of the landowners' wishes. We believe a cleanup fund is a much needed assurance for our state and for our landowners. And finally, we reiterate our support for the landowners' rights and livelihoods and will continue to work for them. Thank you.    
MS. OLSEN: High, my name is Trista Olsen, and I'm here today not only as a Mellette County Rancher, but as a business owner and a mother of three. I hear a lot of assumptions being made today, 12 but I'm not hearing very many facts being presented. Gas prices, Keystone XL will increase gas prices for Americans, especially family farms like mine. By draining Midwestern refineries of cheap 16 Canadian crude into export oriented refineries in the Gulf Coast, Keystone XL will increase the cost of gas for Americans. The TransCanada 2008 permit application states, and I quote, "Existing markets for Canadian heavy crude, principally PADD2, U.S. Midwest, are currently oversupplied resulting in price discounts for Canadian heavy crude oil. Accessing the U.S. GC U.S. Gulf Coast via the Keystone XL Pipeline is expected to strengthen Canadian crude oil pricing in the Midwest by removing the over supply. This is especially to increase the price of heavy crude to the equivalent cost of imported crude. This resulting increase in the price of heavy crude is estimated to provide an increase in annual revenue to the Canadian producing industry in 2013 of U.S. 2 billion to U.S. 3.9 billion." Independent analysts of these figures found 12 this would increase per gallon prices by 20 cents per gallon in the Midwest. According to an independent analyst, U.S. farmers, who spent 12.4 billion on fuel in 2009, could see expenses rise to 16 15 billion or higher in 2013 if the pipeline goes through. At least 500 million of that added expenses would come direct from the Canadian market manipulation. Jobs. In 2008, TransCanada presidential permit application for Keystone XL to the State Department indicated a peak work force of approximately 3,500 to 4,000 construction personnel. Jobs estimated above those listed on the application draw from a 2011 report commissioned by TransCanada that estimates a 20,000 person years of employments, based on a non public forecast model, using undisclosed inputs provided by TransCanada. According to TransCanada's own data, only 11 percent of the construction jobs on the Keystone 1 pipeline in South Dakota were filled by South Dakotans. Most of them for temporary, low pay, manual labor. 12 TransUnion ATU and the Transport Workers' Union both oppose the pipeline. Their August 2011 statement, "We need jobs, but not ones based on increasing our reliance on tar sands oil." There is 16 no shortage of water and sewage pipelines that need to be fixed or replaced, bridges or tunnels that are in need of emergency repair, transportation infrastructure that needs to be renewed and developed. Many jobs could also be created in energy conservation and upgrading the grid and maintaining and expanding public transportation. A rupture in the Keystone XL Pipeline could cause a BP oil spill in America's heartland over the source of fresh drinking water for 2 million people. The U.S. Pipeline Safety Administration has not yet conducted an in depth analyst of the safety of the diluted bitumen, raw tar sands pipeline, despite unique safety concerns posed by the more corrosive properties of this pipeline. TransCanada predicted that the Keystone 1 Pipeline would see one spill in seven years. But in company was ordered to dig up 10 sections of pipe after government ordered tests indicated that defective steel had been used. And the Keystone XL manufacturer, not from America. Keystone XL will cross through America's agricultural land, the Missouri and Ivora  River, the Ogallala Aquifer, sage grass habitat, wildlife fisheries and many more. The tar sands oil will not reduce dependency on foreign oil. Keystone XL will not lessen U.S. dependency. The Keystone XL is an export pipeline. According to their own presentation to investors, Gulf Coast refiners plan to refine the cheap Canadian crude supplied by the pipeline into diesel and other products for export to Europe and Latin America. Proceeds from the exports are earned tax free. Much of the fuel refined from the pipeline's heavy crude oil will never reach U.S. driver's tanks. Think about it. Why can't you guys build your ours.    
MR. STEELE: Could I have please, Mr. Paul please.  
MR. SEAMANS: My name is Paul Seamans, from Draper, South Dakota, and Keystone will cross 1 1/2 miles of my land, south of Interstate 90. And I would like to welcome all of our out of state friends to South Dakota.   There are many issue that the FEIS does not adequately address and that need further study. One issue is the area of pipeline safety. TransCanada had previously predicted that the Keystone 1 Pipeline, Keystone XL's much shorter sister line, would see only one spill in seven years for the entire line. In fact, there have been 14 spills in just the U.S. alone since becoming operational in June of 2010. Diluted bitumen is considered much more of the corrosive crude on the pipeline's interior needs more study. These potentially unsafe pipelines could pose a major threat to our drinking South Dakota or the Yellowstone River in Montana could make its way into the Missouri River. A majority of South Dakotans obtain their drinking water through rural water systems that in turn get their water directly from the Missouri River. An even more troubling scenario would be a leak into the Ogallala Aquifer in Nebraska. A leak in the Ogallala would affect drinking water in Nebraska and all states south through Texas. TransCanada considers an alternate route to the east of the Ogallala as being unneeded and too expensive. This refusal to reroute shows a shortsightedness and the arrogance of TransCanada. TransCanada has tried to sell the Keystone XL as being important to the national security of the U.S.. TransCanada tries to convince us that the XL will decrease our dependence on oil nations promises that the tar sands oil will remain in the United States. The XL will be built to the Gulf Coast, where oil fields themselves in Alberta have many foreign countries with an ownership stake in them, TransCanada being one of the principles. TransCanada touts the urgent need for the XL. In fact, oil industry officials have estimated that the present tar sands pipelines can handle a volume of crude to be produced in the tar sands oil fields until the year 2020. Further more, this pipeline will only tend to hasten the destruction of the Boreal Forest in Alberta due to strip mining being used to recover the bitumen. There appears to be no pressing need to build Keystone 
XL. I would urge the State Department to take their time in considering this presidential permit and to determine, in fact, if this pipeline is needed and in the best interest of the United States. Thank you. 11    
MR. SPEARS: Hi, my name is Pat Spears. I serve as the president of Intertribal Coup of the Council on Utility Policy, and I represent 15 tribes 15 throughout the Dakotas, Nebraska and Wyoming. The mining of tar sands oil from Northern Alberta has a devastating impact on the lands, water, forests and the ecosystems, wildlife and health of the Cree and the Dene Nations in Canada. You don't hear any talk about that and what it's doing to the land and water and the health of the people up there, and the huge amount of water it takes to mix that with the toxic chemicals and such. Those spills up there are so toxic that people can only go in there with safety equipment on for an hour. And the skin on the exposed parts of your body, on the wrists and neck, burns. So, they can only stand it for an hour. That's how bad that stuff is. Now, this energy intensive high carbon extraction process combined with the future burning of fuels compounds the impact on global warming. If 11 tar sands mining is fully expanded, the impacts in climate change will be irreversible. The proposed Keystone XL Pipeline is a 1,700 mile long fuse to the largest carbon bomb in North America. 15 The transportation of the tar sands oil to the United States refineries via Keystone XL and other planned pipelines extends these environmental risks to the indigenous and all people along the pipelines in Montana, the Dakotas, Nebraska, Kansas, Oklahoma and Texas. This includes damages to cultural resources, water, land and the ecosystems of the treatied lands being crossed for pipeline construction. Many leaks and oil spills have already occurred, due to corrosion in the pipelines, without adequate protection and remediation. The Intertribal Council on Utility Policy opposes the extraction of tar sands oil and pipeline construction that's weaving its way through the Indian reservations in the Missouri Basin and across the treaty lands occupied by all peoples in Canada and the United States. It's our position that the wildlife, cultural resources and human health are not worth the limited benefits of a few more years of oil consumption at a higher cost. supply in the United States. The Keystone XL Pipeline will likely increase the price of crude oil and refined oil and provide access for export to other countries. So, this higher cost of oil would increase the price of all products, especially agriculture and food, and will mean loss of even more jobs in a depressed economy, as related in a recent study by Cornell University. There are alternatives to continued fossil fuel burning for energy. There are biofuels and electric vehicles that could be powered by plants, the wind and the sun. We think these sources of renewable energy should be the first priority for investment by the investment community and support by the United States Government. I think these jobs will have a longer term and sustained economic benefit to the people here in the United States, rather than a company that isn't even going to benefit the people here the way that you hear the rhetoric expounded. So for these reasons, we strongly urge that the future and current impacts of a tar sands pipeline. And to meet with the indigenous nations leadership in both the U.S. and Canada. The Great Plains Tribal Chairman's association took action yesterday, opposing these pipeline constructions for the reasons that are stated, and they've asked for consultation directly in a meeting with the State Department and the administration as soon as possible, so that there can be direct and meaningful consultation of dealings with the tribes as government to government. So, we're very concerned about our water for the future of our children and our agriculture and all life that it sustains here throughout the Great Plains. Thank you for this time.    
MR. MCGOVERN: Hi, I'm Matt McGovern, from 10 Sioux Falls, and I work for the National Wildlife Federation in South Dakota. And I worked for the National Wildlife Federation because of the values that I learned growing up in my family. My 14 grandmother grew up on a family farm in Woonsocket and spent every day outside, out with animals and wildlife. And she taught us, from a very early age, that taking care of the land, taking care of the air we breathe, taking care of the water is just part of having good values and part of common sense. We are called to determine here whether this project is in the national interest. And I think that protecting a livable climate is in the national interest and that the Keystone XL Pipeline is a threat to that. Protecting wildlife is in the national interest. Focusing on a transition to a clean energy economy that will create jobs and enhance our security is also in the national interest. South Dakota is a leader in clean energy, and we should not sacrifice for a project that benefits China and Canada the way Keystone XL does. And the 10 way Keystone XL is in Canada's interest and not in our interest is by raising gas prices, especially in the Midwest. And I just want to read what TransCanada said in their own application to the 14 Canadian government for the permits that they needed to build the pipeline in Canada. It's Section 3, Supplying Markets, 3-43 Crude Pricing Impact. TransCanada claimed that, "Existing markets for Canadian crude, principally Pad 2, that's the Midwestern oil market, are currently oversupplied, resulting in price discounting for Canadian heavy crude. Access to the U.S. Gulf Coast via the Keystone XL Pipeline is expected to strengthen Canadian crude oil pricing by removing this oversupply. This is expected to increase the price of heavy crude to the equivalent cost of imported crude. The result in increase in the price of heavy crude is estimated to provide an increase in annual revenue to the Canadian producing industry in 2013 of two to four billion dollars, American dollars." So, we really should consider just building a second pipeline to send money north, which would be 10 taking that money out of consumer's pockets. That would mean less money for us to spend here in the Midwest. That's going to cost jobs. That's going to harm our economy and is not in the American 14 national interest. At a hearing, kind of similar to this one in September 17th, 2009, consultants for TransCanada testified to the Canadian National Energy Board about what they called their strategy to increase gas prices in the Midwest. And I'm just going to read some quotes from a Mr. Davies. He is asking, "So first of all, this strategy as you call it, would be intended to raise the crude price not only in Pad 2, but also in Ontario, right?" Mr. Wise, "Yes, it would raise it in Ontario and in Western Canada. And to be clear, the strategy is their producer, who supplies the committed volume on XL, would be prepared to take a financial hit in order to raise crude prices in Pad 2, in Ontario, right?" Mr. Wise, "Yes." And I'm just reading this so that it's in the record and that we can have our government consider 10 whether raising our own gas prices is in the national interest. So, this is going to result in higher gas important issue. We're in a jobs crisis right now. And when our own South Dakota Public Utilities Commission looked at this and filed their own report on the assessment of associated economic impacts, they said it would create six permanent jobs in South Dakota, and that the temporary construction jobs would be mostly going to people out of state. So, I think we need to focus on a transition to clean energy, which will create up to 2 million jobs here in America. Clean, renewable energy. Many of these policies were supported by the unions that are represented here today. And I think that's one of the best things that's happened in politics in recent years is labor unions and conservationists working together to support policies to help transition to clean energy, which creates jobs. And I think that's where we should focus our energy, and not a national interest.    
MR. BECKER: Good afternoon. My name is and also the Rocky Mountain District Council Number 5. Thank you for the opportunity to speak today. Everybody has heard all the benefits of this Keystone XL Pipeline. I'd like to urge President Obama to give the presidential permit for this. It's going to create 20,000 jobs right off the bat, and put seven billion dollars in our economy. It's going to increase our national security, and it's a good start to get off Mideast oil and South American oil. Also, we have the environmental protections here in the United States that other countries don't have, and we already know that China is in line to take this oil if we don't take it. Thank you for your time, and again I rise in support of this.    
MR. STEELE: Can I have please Mr. Joseph Mr. Rick Allen, Mr. Paul Lepisto, please. And you are?  
MR. TAYLOR: I am Lynn Taylor. I am a an expert, professional equipment operator, and all of our operators here are expert professionals as well as the other tradesman here. And we support this pipeline project. And I would like all the people in support of this, tradesman and professionals, to stand with me now and show your support of this project.   We would ask that the State Department-  
MR. STEELE: Excuse me, please. I would ask that we give these folks the courtesy to have their views heard, and you will, in turn, receive the exact same courtesy. Continue, please.  
MR. TAYLOR: And we would ask that the State Department approve this project. Thank you very much.   9 
MR. STEELE: Is Mr. Santarella here, please?  
MR. SANTARELLA: Good afternoon. My name is Joseph Santarella, and I proudly serve as counsel 13 for the Rocky Mountain Pipeline Trade Council, as well as many of the unions in this room today. Today, I present these comments on behalf of the Rocky Mountain Pipe Trades Council, which strongly supports the proposed Keystone XL Project for many of the reasons that we've already heard this afternoon. The Rocky Mountain Pipe Trades District Council, however, would like to reinforce that the proposed project is in the United States national interest for the following reasons: First of all, the United States can reduce its dependence on oil from the Middle East and the flow of our nation's assets to countries whose political and social values are inconsistent with our own. In many instances, support those that seek to harm this great nation. labor agreement, the Keystone XL Project will be built with American union labor. That means good paying jobs with benefits for American workers in a have stymied efforts to jumpstart our economy. Moveover, the Keystone XL project will be constructed by experienced, well trained, American workers. Your neighbors, who care about this country's environment because it's their home. Even more significantly, these union workers have undergone extensive training under apprenticeship programs that will result in high quality construction to build the safest pipeline possible. For example, the United Association Pipefitters are trained under a five year apprenticeship program, with more than 40 different welding certifications. I'd also like to address a couple of comments that I've heard this afternoon. First of all, with regard to the pipeline spills in the original Keystone Project, we note that those were all at the 8 pumping stations. Pumping stations that were built by non union labor, that were not benefitting from the apprenticeship program that has been trained, and these members, make them valued journeymen. 12 Second of all, with regard to the steel. Indeed, the original pipeline was built with Chinese steel. But thanks to an agreement with the United Steelworkers, this pipeline will be built with American steel, high quality American steel.   Reality is that the United States remains reliant on petroleum. I didn't notice many bicycles parked in the parking lot outside. And indeed, even the buses that arrived were driven by petroleum. We agree that we need to transition to a cleaner economy. But that clean economy is going to take time, and at this point, our politics are not allowing it to go forward. In the meantime, we need jobs, good jobs, high paying jobs that provide benefits. And this pipeline will built by Americans, Americans that care about this community and Americans that are dedicated to making sure that 8 this pipeline does not foul our air, does not foul our water or does not foul our land. We have to recognize that every step we take, every morning we wake up, we take risks. This is 12 indeed a risk, but it is a risk that is worthwhile and necessary under the circumstances, particularly, in light of the fact that we have been unable to wean ourselves from petroleum. And I, myself, personally prefer that we get our petroleum from Canada, not from Saudi Arabia and other nations that trample on human rights. Finally, I want to reinforce that the Rocky Mountain Pipe Trade District Council urges the Department of State to grant the presidential permit for the Keystone Project. We believe it is firmly in the national interest. Thank you for your time and your attention.    
MR. ALLEN: Rick Allen.  
MR. STEELE: Rick Allen, right, right.  
MR. ALLEN: My name is Rick Allen. I'm the business manager of the Rocky Mountain Pipe 8 Trades District Council Number 5. Covers Colorado, Wyoming, western South Dakota and the panhandle in Nebraska. In the United States, we have a pretty big 12 unemployment issue, as a lot of people in here have testified to today. In construction, it's about two to three times what the national average is. And in some areas, much worse than that. I know several members that have been out of work for two to three years, with no opportunities coming in the near future. This pipeline, if it's built in the United States, will create thousands of jobs and put many union members and other people who would like to have the opportunity to be a union member, to work. What happens here when people go to work, they spend their money on goods and services in the communities along the route of this pipeline. Those goods and services will have to hire people to cover the demand. This is how the economy is turned around. Things like this is what fixes economies, right at disaster levels right now. So, this pipeline is a good start to help turn this thing around. that we protect our environment. It's the only one we have. I believe that if we oppose this pipeline for environmental reasons, then we allow the oil sands in Canada to be shipped to the Pacific Coast or wherever, and shipped to a country that may have no environmental protections in place while they refine this oil, causing greater damage. It's one world, whether we damage it here or damage it in China. If we damage the environment, the environment is damaged. With the Pipeline Hazardous Material and Safety Administration will oversee this pipeline, and make sure that we adhere to the environmental standards that are required in the United States of America. That's environmental justice. That's making sure this pipeline is done properly. I know for a fact, coming through the trades myself as a plumber, five year training program we have is among the best in the world, I guarantee you. The welders that we have are certified to do this work. They do it all The welds are actually stronger than the pipe when they are done making them. And I feel that if the State Department will approve the presidential permit for this thing, we can put people to work in this country. And that's the most important thing we can do. Thank you for your time.    
MR. LEPISTO: Good afternoon. My name is Paul Lepisto. I'm an original conservation coordinator for the Isaac Walton League of America. The Isaac Walton League of America appreciates this opportunity to provide comment on this proposed Keystone XL Pipeline Project. The league is one of America's oldest conservation organizations. Currently, we have over 38,000 members in 260 chapters across the country. At our national convention that was held in July in Des Moines, the states that, "The league opposes the construction of the Keystone XL Pipeline and any other tar sands pipelines until the following conditions are met: a thorough review by all relevant local, state and federal regulatory bodies with authority over the pipeline and its design and operation, to ensure that public and environmental health is protected. Number two, governmental permitting and regulatory agencies shall require the incorporation of failsafe provisions, such as double wall pipe and leak detection monitors in new pipeline construction and operation and in repairs of existing pipelines, in order to protect surface water, ground water, human health, soils and wildlife. And number three, penalties, financial assurance and or reparations should be established as part of the construction and operation permitting process, in the event of any noncompliance and to mitigate any damages to the public and environmental health. chance to provide comment on this important issue, and we thank you for your time and your consideration. 11   
MR. STEELE: Next please, number 97, Mr. Steve Callahan; 98, Ms. Rebecca Leas; 99, Mr. Gill Koetzle and number 100 please, Ms. Hazel Bonder.  
MR. CALLAHAN: Hello, my name is Steve Callahan. I am a member of the United Association of Plumbers and Pipefitters. One of the biggest challenges that we face today is high unemployment. Unemployment in the construction industry is at nearly 40 percent, compared to the 9.1 overall unemployment rate. It is estimated that the Keystone Project will put roughly 20,000 Americans to work. From construction workers to the workers who make the pipe, which I believe is in Pennsylvania, and the pumps that will be made, which are going to be manufactured in Ohio, and to those that transport the materials to the job site. 7 Personal income could see a boost of 6.5 billion dollars, and this pipeline will not cost the American taxpayer a penny. In total, the Keystone Project is expected to 11 create 20 billion dollars of economic stimulus to the U.S. during construction. It will also create hundreds of permanent jobs along the multi-state route. These are long term, good paying jobs. In addition, the United Association has partnered with the U.S. Military to create the Veterans in Piping Program. This provides returning veterans with 16 weeks of accelerated welding training. This training is free to veterans who are placed in construction careers nationwide. The VIP Program kicked off at Camp Pendleton, turning out combat Marines with several welding certificates and the weapons to be employed, not an unemployed statistic upon release from the Marine Corps. This program continues at Camp Pendleton. It is also in use in Lacey, Washington with the Washington National Guard and Washington State graduate was a class at the Army National Guard's Camp William in Wisconsin. The Keystone XL Pipeline is an ideal worksite country. Nearly 300 veterans are currently employed with a career through the VIP Program. There has been all kinds of, three different environmental impact statements conducted on this project. The final EIS reaffirms the findings of the two previous statements, that this pipeline will have a minimal impact on the environment. This pipeline will have a degree of safety greater than any typically constructed domestic oil pipeline under current regulation. This pipeline will be tested at a higher level of pressure than is called for in the code. It will have more mainline valves, will be buried deeper than required, and will be inspected and cleaned more often than the code calls for. In addition, TransCanada plans to build additional protective sealed concrete conduit around near the surface. The Keystone Pipeline will help to reduce our dependency on foreign oil from the unstable Middle do business with countries who utilize child labor and slave labor. Watch the nightly news and see how these countries treat its citizens. Canada is one of our strongest and closest allies. This project will only strengthen our countries' relationship and allow both countries to prosper. If we do not buy this oil from Canada, some other country will. They will refine that oil and sell it back to us at a much higher rate. This oil will likely be transported twice on the oceans in barges and ships, which pose a much greater risk for a catastrophic accident. The oil in Canada is coming out of the ground no matter what we as Americans choose to do. Canada already exports 99 percent of its oil to the U.S.. Stopping the Keystone XL Pipeline will not stop the We need to create jobs, both short term and long term, by supporting this project. We need to transport this oil in the safest, most economical that. Please support this pipeline. Thank you.    
DR. LEAS: Doctor Rebecca Leas, 40 year health professional, Rapid City, South Dakota. Quality of life isn't measured only by what we gain but also by what we trade for it. I understand the cry for jobs. All of us care about jobs. Interestingly, as I've studied these documents on this issue over the last two years, what I was reading originally suggested 5,000 to 6,000 jobs. And it seems in recent weeks, this is now been inflated to 20,000 jobs. I'm just not sure about all that number. All of us do care about jobs, and it's also a shame that those of us that care about land rights, health and environment seem to be portrayed as anti-job and now even anti-veteran. the number of out of state people who have talked today, that are wanting to come here and not care about the loss of land to South Dakotans, the loss electric prices and many other prices that we will suffer as a result of this project. These folks, many of them, while I understand their need for jobs, these types of jobs are very temporary, and we will be left with permanent results that will be to our disadvantage. You heard first off today how safe this project will be. A META analysis of pipelines nationally shows a preponderance of leaks and toxic problems. So, I believe this safe claim is simply not true. The current XL Pipeline promised one leak in seven years, and it has had twelve spills in one year. All the claims made today about roads, schools, taxes, are not born out by the data. This is akin to the Holy Grail. In North Dakota, where the oil fever is currently raging, roads have been destroyed and are seeing rampant alcohol, drugs, rape, whorehouses and a generally dangerous environment. Be careful what you wish for. is spoiled, sickness and mortality will follow. XL itself admits in their documents that crude prices will go up. The long terms impact is a big negative for South Dakota. And lastly, I find the arrogant Canadians and some arrogant Americans unconscionable in their lack or mention and care for the Native Americans and the native peoples that are dealing with the toxic situations up in Alberta. This is just simply unacceptable. Thank you.    
MR. KOETZLE: Thank you. My name is Gill Koetzle, and I'm here today representing the Operating Engineers, Local 49. Brother and sister Americans, we gather here today to address a serious issue, that being the future of our country. How we can safely reduce our friendly neighbor that supports us and supports our future. This is about jobs. This is about security. independence from our oppressors. It's time that we all join together, get this project completed and guarantee life as we know it, while our country segues to more alternative energy sources. The time is right. The time is now to approve this project. I ask your support.    
MS. BONNER: My name is Hazel Bonner, and I come as an individual resident of Rapid City, South Dakota. I also am a member of the Prairie Hills Audubon Society and the National Audubon Society. I am very concerned about this pipeline and the potential danger that it will bring to our area. There will be few jobs, and these jobs will be temporary. Once the pipeline is built, it will primarily be automated. It will actually raise the 5 fuels costs. We discussed that several times. I will not go over those facts. Unprecedented eminent domain has been used against the landowners. We've heard some of that 9 information, but not very much of it. The devastation in Canada, itself, and especially the massive misuse of the Boreal Forest in Canada and the horrible protest that's going on there have been outrageous. The Boreal Forest is a major nesting ground for millions of birds and the habitat for many other kinds of wildlife. Most of all, however, and I bring with me a message from an 82 year old elder resident of Rapid City, Mary Far Thunderbright. She could not be here because of health concerns. "We are most concerned about the danger to the Ogallala Aquifer. It provides clean water to the entire center of our nation. The risk of leaks on this pipeline are - - we've already heard about the ones that have already occurred. But the high temperature in the pipes of about 3,000 degrees create problem with leaks. We must protect the aquifer because of the danger to 5 our water supply. Thank you.   
Mr. STEELE: Next, I have Mr. Mark Rogers, Ms. Sandra Little, Mr., I presume, Sid St. Pierre 9 and Mr. Peter Bardeson.  
MR. ROGERS: Hi, my name is Mark Rogers. I'm the business agent for Sheetmetal Workers Local 10, president of the Eastern South Dakota Building Trades and executive Board member of the AFL CIO. South Dakota Building Trades and the South Dakota AFL rise in support of this project. I was born here, raised here, more than likely die here. I love this state. We still have the family farm in north of Forestburg on the James River. I raise my family here, hunt, fish, camp and thoroughly enjoy this state. Even though we need these jobs and the economic boost, I would not support this project if it were harmful to South Dakota's people. It is not. It is beneficial to us and our country. What better than North American Oil? Though South Dakota has weathered the economic 5 hit better than a lot of areas, we are feeling it. And all that personally too. My wife owns a bar and grill, and like most small businesses, it's experienced two years of downturn. 9 We need to start growing our economy again. This is a shovel ready job that's privately funded. Let's build it and get the ball rolling back to the economic recovery. Put Americans back to work and support our great neighbors to the north, and help our local governments with the needed boost in revenues. I too support alternative energy. Whether we want to believe it or not, we are many, many years from weaning ourselves from fossil fuels. But we can do something now to start weaning ourselves from  OPEC. Thank you.    
MS. LITTLE: My name is Sandra Little, and I come here as a enrolled member of the Oglala Sioux Tribe. And I want everybody to take a look at this T-shirt. You are treading on indigenous land. You made this into law, and you need uphold the law. It 5 affects a lot of indigenous people, and I have to cry every time you guys rape Mother Earth. You don't even consider her. Our lives depend on her. She provides everything for us, and you want to take 9 it away again. It hurts. We don't have jobs, but we don't okay the pipeline. You need to think about what you are doing. You speak of green, everything green, but it sure isn't the environment. It's money that you think of. We don't have money, but we don't go around digging up the earth that provides everything for us. Mother Earth is crying too. You don't hear her because you people don't connect with her. The Lakota People are given the power to take care of Mother Earth. You people are given the power of fire. You look around you, and you must use it. You have to think about what you're doing. And I have a message for you to take back to Mr. Obama. Mr. Obama, please don't okay this helped put you in office Mr. Obama, you okay this pipeline, you're not going to have my vote the next time around. And I know that there's a lot of have to say no. Thank you for listening to me.    
MR. ST. PIERRE: That is why I'm here. Good afternoon, pleasurable afternoon. I am Mr. Syd Ear St. Pierre, I have been on my country, our country, for 62 years. And for 62 years, I have experienced the violation of the treaties. I wondered if it would ever stop? That became the reason for my formal education. I had traveled the United States, visited with all the normal people. I have been to Europe and visited the good people over there. I pray that Mr. Obama would make a good, honest decision for the future of our nations. And I am here today just to give some insights. I will abbreviate, but I hope you get my point. These insights for the predictions of the in these very short, few, months, maybe weeks. And we're going to be experiencing something that the oil pipeline, why it should not have been built. oil. I would say you drink some oil and let's see how long you live. I want to say the water is the crux of life.   I am an environmentalist by nature. I am an artist, besides other careers. But I am an environmentalist by nature and an artist by education. I want to say that 42 years ago, I went to the art school in Sante Fe New Mexico, and I saw my brothers, I saw about three brothers who were painting oil barrels in the lakes, in the water, the collapse of skyscrapers, the pollution that was going to be happening to this earth. Now, that was a prediction 42 years ago, and I see it happening today. In my travels in the world, I have seen and heard from other good people that they were seeing 3 the jetstreams moving as they are. Been created by universal influences that I know a lot of people don't know about, but I do. And so, I see that catastrophe is looming on the horizon. And you 7 people who want jobs, jobs are healthy. Jobs are good for everybody. So, are the higher institutions of education.  These things that are happening are going to be showing us that these spills are going to continue no matter where, no matter how good you can feed the people your opinion. People who are weak-willed will hear you. They'll listen to you. But the oil spills, like for instance, the one up in Fargo. Not too many people know about that one. That was from the same company on the same efforts. That happened recently. And all I can say is whatever goes around comes around, as that is what is happening today. Positive advantages far outweigh greed, hypocrisy, ignorance. And I encourage for all of us to disbound  arrogance quality to possess. And I am going to want to pray, like I said, that President Obama makes the correct decision. watching America, the American government. Because this is my land, this is my country, our country, but your government. And I'm opposed to that. Thank you.    
MR. BARDESON: Hi, my name is Pete Bardeson. I'm the business manager for Laborers' Local 620 for the proud state of South Dakota. Today, I want to read you a story. It's a story that you hear in every town, every city, every state in the United States. And this is from a gentleman who we hired, sent to pipeline training and safety school and went to work and worked on the Keystone line that ran through the eastern part of South Dakota. "My name is Bruce Pierson. I have lived in South Dakota all my life in the Sioux Falls area, the past eight years and managed well. My concrete business supported me and my family. We have four children, ages six, four and twins, age two. my salary. This year however, I could not find a job. I was out looking, talking to people day after day, but there was no work. When the pipeline hired me to work on the pipeline, I was desperate. We struggled to make our house payments and paid 1,200 dollars monthly for our health insurance because my twins have health problems. I was afraid that we were going to lose our home and all of our equity. And where do you put four kids, my wife and I? I feel pipelines saved us. They pay me good money and provide insurance. There were 600 people working on my spread. All of them lived in small communities in South Dakota, bought groceries, clothing, gasoline for their vehicles. That had to make an impact on those communities. I have talked to other businessmen, and it for a long time. I will need a job to be a productive father and South Dakotan. I hope South Dakota will support the pipeline construction.    
MR. STEELE: Next, I would like to call please, Mr. Andrew Catt Ironshell, Ms. Bernadette Usera, Ms. Lois Elaine Big Eagle, and Ms. Kristin Aschenbrenner, please.  
MR. IRONSHELL: My name is Andrew Ironshell and I am a landholder in the Sicangu Lakota Sioux Nation. My words to you today is that, at this time, it is felt that the United States government is breaking the law. You have failed to consult with our tribal nations as is required by law. We're asking you to follow the letter of your own law. That's what you hold me accountable to do. So, Secretary Clinton and President Obama, who should know - he is a member of the Crow Nation, as I recall - that tribal nations are parallel to state at the table prior to this process here of meeting with tribal nations. You have failed to fulfill that legal development that is coming to our area - I'm unemployed. I have six children. I have struggled with the health of my children as my fellow South Dakotan has just said. But think about the economic development that we're asking to bring in that nobody is talking about. Look up north in Minot and Williston, and you'll find economic development of slum lords, prostitution, dope dealers. These are all symptoms that come in with these pipeline folks. I'm not saying that our folks, our South Dakota workers probably have good values, most South Dakotans do. But you look at the pipeline in Alaska and the increase in sexual assaults, STD rates, unwarranted pregnancies, crime. Those are all symptoms of the economic development that you guys want to pipe in here. Now, who wants to sacrifice 2 their daughters in this room to that? At least one or two or three of you are going to pay that price. Now, are you going to sacrifice your children for that type of economic development? If you are, then 6 good for you; we'll say some prayers for you like that. But that is the type of economic development that we're going to get. We're not going to get lower gas prices, China will. We're just being used, and I'm totally against this pipeline personally. And I would ask that you do your job and meet with the tribes. And I can tell you right now that you will build a pipeline around our tribal nations because we're not going to allow it. Thank you for your time.    
MS. USERA: I'm Bernadette Usera from Sturgis, South Dakota. Thank you for having us, Mr. Steele. I appreciate the time that you are putting into this. If this is such a great deal, then why isn't Canada developing it's own refining and taking care of this crude oil themselves and then building the 2 pipeline all the way to their East Coast or their West Coast? Why across our land and our country?   The comments were made about some of the 6 spills. They weren't that great. And I can't recall the gentleman that made the comment about, "Well, they were just small spills." I don't think Michigan would ever say that whatever happened with their pipeline was a small spill or the people around the Yellowstone River, where the recent spill was at. They would not say that was a small spill, and they will be for years cleaning up after that, just as they still are cleaning up after the Exxon Valdez. What was that, in 1989? They are still cleaning up from that, and they are still cleaning from BP's spill in the Gulf Coast. Jobs are important. I will not deny that. We need the jobs here in the United States, but we also need clean water. Water is so important to us. Water is more important than even gold. And once you contaminate it, it's very difficult to get that clean water back again. 2 I grew up with a well on our yard, and that water was great to taste. It was always cold in the summertime. What's going to happen now? Not if the spill happens, but when that spill happens, and will 6 it be over the aquifer that is there for all of us to use and not be contaminated by greed. Because with this crude, why are we now going after tar sand oil? Are there not other ways of getting energy that we need? And I'm saying yes, let's use the solar. Let's use the windpower. Those are the things that we need to seriously be looking at and taking care of.   And the other quick comment was this isn't going to cost the taxpayers a dime, okay, because it's privately funded. Well, what's the heavy equipment going to be driving on? The bridges and the roads that you and I pay for. And who is going to repair them then? Those are the issues that we have to look at also. And I thank you for your time.  
MS. ASCHENBRENNER: Hi, my name is Kristin Aschenbrenner. I'm from Rapid City, South Dakota, and I'm here today on behalf of Dakota Young throughout the state. They vary in age between 13 and 36. We have high school chapters, college chapters, and community wide chapters for urban, rural and reservation communities across the state. We oppose the pipeline for multiple reasons. You've heard a lot of arguments about job creation today. Most of those speakers have been from out of state. If you look at the report from the Public Utilities Commission from hearings in South Dakota, you'll get the real story on job creation for our state. In that report, it specifically says that this will only create six long term jobs for South Dakota. That's it. In addition, you've heard a lot about energy security. Most of the oil is destined for export rather than for the U.S., and economists predict 1 that this will actually raise gas prices in the Midwest. Tar sands oil is one of the dirtiest fuels in the world, in addition to being highly corrosive. 5 It will do nothing to move us towards clean energy, and the corrosive nature makes spills increasingly likely. Keystone 1 is a clear indication of this, with 12 spills in 12 months. We do support job creation, in addition to energy independence, but we don't believe that either of those things will come from the Keystone Pipeline. For those reasons and more, the South Dakota Young Democrats oppose issuing a permit to Keystone. Thank you.    
MR. STEELE: Are you Lois? Please.  
MS. BIG EAGLE: Thank you. Thank you for allowing me to speak. My name is Lois Elaine Big Eagle; I go by Elaine Eagle. I would like to direct this most especially to words. But I don't have a picture and words are all I have. When the trees go down the land turns to sand. I see the earth, the sweet earth, red Mother Earth. I see the sky; it used to be so blue and purified by the rain, the wind, the snow. I see the eagle flying high in the sky, circling above with a message of love. I see the land, the railroad tracks cutting through her back. I see the black hole mine pit. The miners are steadily stripping away bit by bit. I see the water glistening; the sun's rays reflecting the heavens on her face, alone in this place I call home. But now walking in this place, broken glass and trash laying all over the place. The signs of the times. What, shall we become like Mars then? Continue on this path of Are we all headed that way? Mars is barren, unproductive, dry, lifeless, cold, fruitless, poor, pitiful and merciless. then? Then they would not have to transport it so far across the country, making U.S.A. and Canada, the wager a merger? Each speaker said, money, money, money over and over again. Money is not everything. The Lakota call the white people "Wasicus" and that means fat takers, greedy people, truce breakers, getting rich and fat off of the land, and now over our land. And now, they want to get fat off of Canada too. Greed is the love of money. The love of money is the root of all evil, not the money itself, the love of it. More taxes, higher taxes, safety, who will clean it up? When will they clean it up? How soon, how often? The Yellowstone River took 59 minutes before anybody even knew about it, the spill. What about the cost to the land? The fish are off then. The Alaska Pipeline was not without problems. And they couldn't even get it going because of the weather and weather problems. 4 When they first came here, they described this land as pristine. "Oh give me a home where the buffalo roam and the deer and the antelope play." Where beavers were busy working in every stream, where the squirrels could cross from the Atlantic Coast to Texas without ever touching the ground. All of this land is Lakota, Dakota land and is sacred land. Land owners, we belong to the land, not that the land belongs to us. We are the keepers of the land and the water. We need to respect Mother Earth. Thank you for your time.    
MR. STEELE: Before we break in about five or six minutes, I'd like, please, if we could do Mr. Jay Davis and Mr. Phillip Wallace, please.  
MR. DAVIS: Good afternoon, Mr. Steele, 165 welcome. My name is Jay Davis. I am an attorney from Rapid City. I've lived in South Dakota for the last 37 years. I'm here today to speak against granting the permit for the Keystone XL Pipeline. 4 First and foremost, our water resource is our life blood in South Dakota, where we have experienced flooding this year. We're often short of good quality water. The aquifers that we're talking about potentially fouling, our aquifers from which people drink. They're aquifers from which stockman water their livestock, their cattle. The aquifer and the water resources are what produce our crops. Nearly half a billion dollars has been invested in the Mini Wiconi Rural Water System, bringing good water to Indian reservations and rural west river communities that did not have it. At some point, the XL Pipeline intersects Mini Wiconi. A rupture could contaminate and destroy that investment that has finally brought good water to communities that needed it. The Keystone 1 Pipeline already has a terrible 166 record with spills. A number of speakers have referenced the 14 spills since June of last year. We're talking about caustic tar sands oil that's very different from West Texas crude or the oil that 4 we're used to using in this country. The Keystone XL Pipeline has no emergency response plan to deal with-  
MR. STEELE: Your microphone has gone dead.  
MR. DAVIS: Okay, is it working now?  
MR. STEELE: I'm not sure it's working, but I can hear you well. There's a separate microphone for the reporter.  
MR. DAVIS: Thank you. We're talking about some of the most caustic oil on the face of the Earth. It's far more corrosive than West Texas crude, and the stuff that we've used do fill our gas tanks in the past. South Dakota's been pushing or working towards cleaner fuel, towards renewable's and alternative energy sources. It's my understanding that the tar sands oil from Alberta is 15 to 20 percent more 167 carbon intensive than the crude oil we've been using. Thus, it turns a Prius into a Hummer, in terms of the contribution of carbons in the atmosphere. 4 South Dakota is already experiencing climate change. That doesn't always mean it's progressively hotter every year. We've had catastrophic flooding. We've had bark beetle infestation in the Black Hills because it doesn't get cold enough in the winter any more to have a die off of the beetles. We have an obligation not to continue to heat the planet out of control and cause worse and worse catastrophic climate change. We are a part of the whole. I would ask that the State Department to not issue the permit for the Keystone XL Pipeline. Thank you.    
MR. WALLACE: My name is Phillip Wallace, and I'm here today in support of TransCanada Keystone XL Pipeline. I'm a proud 36 year welder, member of Pipeliners' Local 798 of the United Association, which has over 340,000 members in the United States and Canada working in the pipeline and pipe trades industry. I serve my local as business agent of the if permitted. I've worked with TransCanada since 2008 on the 30 inch Keystone Pipeline that ran from North Dakota, Canadian border to Kushing, Oklahoma and Potoka, Illinois. So, I know TransCanada pretty well. The four crafts that build these pipelines, the Operating Engineers, United Association, the Teamsters, the International Labor Union. We all are well trained. We have training centers at our home locales, and we train our young members into being the craftsmen it takes to build a good pipeline. And we also, in our training centers, like some other members have already said, we are very accepting to our young men and women coming out of the military. And that's something we need to look at. We need to get our young sons and daughters out of that Mid East that are fighting for this oil. And getting it from our close neighbors, that's a no-brainer. We've got to have this. The jobs it creates, over 13,000 jobs. And these are for been said. Over in Glendive and here today, I heard a lot of untrue facts that have been said about the leaks. There has been some leaks. The Keystone Pipeline has not been ruptured. The leaks were inside these pump stations on small bore piping, half inch, one inch, threaded piping, not welded pipe. Threaded piping, screwed fittings, that ruptured, broke in the threads due to the vibration of the pumps. And another point I want to - - the vibration of the pipeline was shut, and then the pipeline was shutdown when the valves were closed. These stations with the spills were not built with union craftsmanship. But TransCanada has brought our contractors in, and I have dispatched my welders, not my welders, my brother welders and pipefitters into these stations to make these repairs and rework these stations. And I dispatched these welders to these pump stations back as far as Memorial Day. Memorial Day weekend was when they called me about these leaks. 3 And a reportable leak is five gallons on the ground. That's a reportable leak. I know of two significant leaks. A lot of people say 14 leaks. They may have been. But I know of two significant leaks. I have these crews in these stations today, still working, reworking, this pipe, reworking the emergency shutdown systems, retubing the instrumentation, and we are still there making it better. TransCanada has learned from mistakes, and we are too. So, I ask Ms. Hillary Rodham Clinton to please grant this permit, so we can get this pipeline in progress. Thank you.    
MR. STEELE: Okay, ladies and gentlemen, thank you very, very much for all of the views that you have given. I want to say something to Mr. Harter. I meant to offer that if the rest of your remarks are in written form, I would be glad to take them and make sure that they are considered.  
MR. HARTER: Thank you.  
MR. STEELE: But thank all of you for your 3 views because we will consider everything that has been said here today. We're going to take a break for about half an hour or so. We will probably come back, oh I don't know, maybe say, five after four. So, we will please welcome you back at that time. Thank you very much.    
MR. STEELE: Ladies and gentlemen, we'd like to go ahead and get started again, please. So those of you out in the lobby, if you would come in and take your seats, we can get started. I would like to start please with number 111, that is Peter Carrels, and then Ms. Barbara Sogn-Frank, Dana Loseke and Kevin Miller please. Please go ahead, we're ready when you are.  
MR. CARRELS: All right. My name is Peter Carrels. I live in Aberdeen, South Dakota. I'm a native of South Dakota. I live in Aberdeen, which is my home town. And Aberdeen is not far from the first TransCanada Pipeline. We saw the influence of 2 pipeliners in my community for about a year. I happen to work for the Sierra Club, and I oppose the XL Pipeline. Pipeline proponents have described the XL issue as pitting anti-oil extremists versus a solid company offering jobs and oil security. And I see this as an inaccurate characterization on both scores. I think we need to incorporate a stronger level of scrutiny when we examine this pipeline and the company proposing the pipeline. We've heard plenty of rhetoric here today, most of it unproven. I submit that this pipeline is not in our nation's best interests nor is it in the best interest of South Dakota. It would not offer energy security. It would not offer substantial permanent employment opportunities in our state. It would not adequately protect natural resources or public health in South Dakota or elsewhere. The problems with this pipeline begin at its source. This tar sands mining is the biggest, largest ecological disaster in the history of mankind. We can't forget that. Is it in our 2 nation's interest to host a problematic pipeline intended to expand international market opportunities, including in China, for tar sands oil investors? This is an export pipeline. Despite all the rhetoric about energy security, oil security, this is an export pipeline and make no mistake about it. Is it in our nation's interest to aid development of the world's most carbon emitting crude oil, when we recognize the vital need to limit carbon emissions? I think the answer to that question is no. TransCanada claims it's export pipeline will be safe. They said the exact same thing about the Keystone 1 Pipeline. In fact, they said it under oath to our public utilities commissioner. That was inaccurate. I think it was deceitful. TransCanada says that the one dozen or more malfunctions that have already happened on Keystone 1 originate in the system's valves and pump stations and not in the pipe itself. This is how they try to deflect accountability. Now, we can not forget that on that breach of 2 pipe there was a foot geyser of oil escaping a pump station along Keystone 1. That malfunction happened last May during the South Dakota, North Dakota border. Is was reported to TransCanada by a landowner residing near that faulty pump station before TransCanada responded to their own so-called leak detection system. We'll never know how much more oil than 20,000 gallons would have escaped from the Keystone 1 system at that location, if not for a vigilant farmer en route to an early Sunday morning church service. I don't trust TransCanada. I don't like the way they have treated my fellow South Dakotans. You've heard from several ranchers here who have struggled with TransCanada. Same thing happened in Eastern South Dakota. I don't think their pipeline is in the best interest of this nation, and I ask that this permit be denied. Thank you.    
MS. SOGN-FRANK: Hello, thank you for this opportunity to be heard. My name is Barbara Sogn-Frank. I'm from Sioux Falls. I was born and 2 raised in South Dakota. I'm a resident of South Dakota. I took the day off today to be here because I feel that this is so important. This is a pivotal decision for our state and for our nation. I feel it's vital to be here, to stand up on this issue and this question. I want to stand with other South Dakotans. I am especially offended that South Dakotans have been bullied and threatened by a foreign company, and I would like to think that our state government would stand up and protect all South Dakotans, all residents of our state, and not allow that kind of behavior. I stand with all South Dakotans. I stand with tribal nations, and I also want to stand up with the state of Nebraska, who had the guts and the courage to say no to TransCanada. And I think we need to say no, too. I think we need to say no on this one in particular. To go through, to take a pipeline, to argue back and forth about whether a pipeline is safe, let alone a tar sands pipeline, but to put it through, States millions of people depend on, is just lunacy. It's lunacy, and I don't want my daughter and her children and our children in the future to look back and have to say, "What were you thinking? What were you thinking?" We can't clean up the Gulf. Huge areas of the Gulf are already identified as dead zones. We don't know if they'll come back, and we don't even know what the implications, what damage has been done. No one knows how to clean up an aquifer. No one knows how to clean up an aquifer. The climate issue, we are at 390 parts per million in carbon. We have to be at 350 in order to at least maintain a climate that our planet can withstand. Continuing tar sands production is not going to help us do that. We talked about America's dependence on oil. We don't have to be dependent on oil. Henry Ford developed a car that ran on corn alcohol. That was his first invention. And it was only because of Rockefeller and Standard Oil forcing through acquiesce and develop his vehicles so that they ran on oil instead, on gasoline. We can do better. We can do better. We need more vision and more courage to say no to this pipeline now. It's the wrong thing for South Dakota and for our nation. Let's put our great resources of South Dakota ingenuity and courage into developing our research and development capabilities with our universities, supporting Dakota Rural Action, supporting Rural Learning Center, smaller, independent efforts that are truly building jobs and supporting communities and individuals and families within South Dakota. Thank you very much.    
MR. LOSEKE: Hi, my name is Dana Loseke. I'm a resident of Sioux Falls, South Dakota, and a registered independent voter. I was not paid to be here, and I am not a paid lobbyist. For the past several years, I was general manager for dairy plants here in South Dakota and the state of Iowa. We process and deliver milk, business, as you understand, we are a large user of diesel fuel for our fleet of trucks. We're a heavy user of high density polyethylene resin for packaging, and user of electricity to refrigerate and process our products. Over the past few years, our company's goal was to reduce our energy use and our carbon footprint by 30 percent. Through a number of initiatives that we started at our plant and through our corporate office, we are able to reduce our diesel fuel usage. We were able to reduce our high density polyethylene usage, and our electricity usage was reduced. And at the same time, we doubled our sales and our profits. We played by the rules, and we won. And so we're an industry, and we're a company that shows that it can be done with existing resources, with existing people. And we kept jobs and expanded jobs. We did not have to rely on a foreign corporation or a foreign country telling us what to do. 1 If all U.S. companies worked to conserve the energy they use today, the interests of the United States would be far better served than a pipeline bringing oil sludge with cancer causing chemicals across our rivers, farmlands, wells and aquifers. And to those of you that may still be here that said, "Yeah, TransCanada Pipeline may be a little bit of an inconvenience." I'm telling you, if you have cancer, if your children or one of your relatives has cancer, that's not a little inconvenience. That is a heartbreaking, agonizing slow death. When I first heard about the TransCanada Pipeline, like all Americans, I naively assumed that it was going to be good to add regular crude to our oil supply. But when I learned it was from tar sands, the dirtiest, most toxic fuel source known today, with Benzene and Naphthalene, known carcinogens, going to be a potential to our water supply, I became very concerned about the safety of our watershed and our farmlands. I did was, number one, the EPA, the agency that has the expertise in protecting our environment, said it is far too dangerous to go ahead with this project.  NASA scientist quote was, "If we go ahead with this project, game over, as far as global warming goes." And if we are worried about losing jobs, think what it's going do to our economy, from rising sea waters when our coastal cities and ports are inundated with sea waters. Third, TransCanada has already had 14 spills in one year. That's seven times greater than what the State Department estimates were, seven times greater. Their track record guarantees that we will have Benzene in our aquifers and in our water. TransCanada, fourth, did not follow through on promises to our landowners. On the first pipeline, they did not even follow through with the promises that they made to the Public Utilities Commission here in South Dakota, as verified by landowners where they built the pipeline. TransCanada has promised to support 600,000 say there is 20,000 jobs, at best. So, I assume the other 580,000 jobs are janitors' jobs in cleaning up from oil spills. I don't think the U.S. wants to be Canada's janitor. It is not in our national interest, again, to postpone our drive for renewable clean energy. It is not in our best interest to favor a foreign country's goals over that of our own citizens, farmers and landowners. And it is not in our best interest to allow foreign corporations to dictate U.S. policies. Finally, in quoting President Obama, "We need to end the age of oil in our time. That is how we can best serve our country's interest." I strongly urge you to not approve the TransCanada 2 Pipeline. Thank you.    
MR. STEELE: May I call please, Mr. Bob Graske? Mr. Paul Moehole, Mr. Kevin Miller and Mr. Richard Hauffe.  
MR. GRASKE: Good afternoon. My name is 182 Bob Graske. I am a member of the Minnesota Building Trades, the Minnesota Pipe Trades and representative of the Minneapolis Pipefitters' Local 539. I'm here today to support this pipeline project. For several reasons, I support it. To save time, I'll narrow it down to just my top three ones. This thing is going to create thousands of jobs. Thousands of good paying jobs, which we desperately need right now, not only for the pipefitters but for all construction trades. Currently, they average about 20 percent unemployment rate, well above the nation's average. They are going to create good paying jobs that will help stimulate the local economy. And probably my most important reason is they will reduce our dependency on getting our oil from the Mid East and create a bunch of jobs all across America. Thank you very much.    
MR. MOEHOLE: Hello, my name is Paul Moehole, and I'm a member of the local 49ers. You know, I've heard a lot of different opinions about this pipeline and what's going on, and a lot of people left. It just showed to me how ignorant some of the people are, that are saying the pipeline brings STDs into the community and whorehouses and drugs and all that. I live in Grand Rapids, Minnesota. We had a pipeline go through there a year and a half ago. Our economy needed it desperately, and it really helped me and my family. And some people, they give different opinions, and that's what makes this country great. We all have our opinions and then we find the best one to go with. But as far as polluting the air, polluting the Mother Earth and all that, I know when I go to any pipeline that I've been dispatched out to, we go through a rigorous four hours of environmental safety, environmental this. I don't know how many times that the environmental people are on the site. Every day I see one of them. To me as an operator, as a professional, I take pride in what I do, and I care about the landowner. I'm not going through there ripping up his land thinking, well, it doesn't really matter to me. Because in Grand Rapids, Minnesota, it mattered to me, and our pipeline looks great. I can't even tell it went through. And I'm in support of this, and I thank you for letting me come to South Dakota. Some of the people had mentioned that they are appalled that I'm here from Minnesota. Well actually, when you guys came up from South Dakota and worked on our pipeline, hey, we welcomed you; we support. It's a free country, and that's why I'm here in South Dakota. Have a great day.    
MR. MILLER: Thanks for the opportunity to speak. My name is Kevin Miller. I reside in Casper, Wyoming. But as a special pipeline representative with the International Union of Operating Engineers, my job is to take care of thousands and thousands of pipeliners with the operating engineers that specialize in the construction that we are discussing today. Everywhere from Maine to Hawaii, Alaska all the way to Florida, everybody needs to go to work. Everybody wants work. It's no secret that you will find variety on this job when it goes. You will see probably 30 or 40 different state's plates. It is what it is, but I can assure you South Dakota will go to work if they choose to go to work for good paying jobs and benefits. The benefits that are paid by the employers that are hiring them that don't cost the taxpayer money. When our kids get sick, our wives or ourselves, we go to the hospital. We're covered. We've earned our dues on that one. There are a couple of things. I heard earlier a gentleman speaking that - - almost conspiracy theory like, and I'm not to insult anybody. But it would be asinine for TransCanada to take and build a seven billion dollar line down to the Gulf if they are just going to export the damned stuff. When it would be a heck of a lot cheaper for them, if that were the case, for them just to kick it over to their coast and ship it to China to build the Red Army. I am here today to urge the State Department to approve that presidential permit for the construction of TransCanada's Keystone Project. There are a lot of people, in the very beginning, and that's all I've heard, but few people have talked about other aspects. They talk about contaminating the Ogallala Aquifer. It's a monster, I think everybody is aware. But what about the towns that have been built on this thing? Nobody can argue that one. How about the crops that are growing on this bugger, and I'm pretty sure - and God bless the farmers, because we need them, there's no two ways about that - the pesticides that are put on these. You don't think some of that permeates in? But you don't hear a whole lot of complaining or uproaring from opposition on that on a yearly basis. No one can guarantee anything, especially that this thing might not have a leak. TransCanada has agreed, to the best of my understanding, they agreed to increase valves for shutoffs, to make things a lot more feasible. In this case, taking a lot more preventative measures than anything else in the country. You can't predict everything that goes on. We go to Mount Rainier. One of these days, she is going to crack loose. Are we supposed to, in the mean time, to prevent all that silica dust from going in the air, are we supposed to go and put a big-ass cork in it? I doubt it. So, the facts are the facts. I think everybody here has got a true environmentalist in them. But there needs to be reason versus extremism, and I hope that people understand the importance of this. Yes, it is jobs, but it is also in everybody's mind that when we are building this - - and TransCanada is not some frickin' villain of the world. I'm glad that there are outfits out there keeping them on their toes. I think it's awesome. I think they should use good materials. But take into consideration where it will go versus where it can go, and what it can do to spur our economy. And it will spur. A loss of revenue in any small town is nothing but a farce. So, thank you for the time once again.    
MR. HAUFFE: Thanks for coming to South Dakota and holding a hearing. I hope you enjoy your stay up here, and we appreciate your willingness to listen to all this. And I do appreciate all the testimony that came forward today from all points of view. We all look at this in different ways, from different walks of life, and everybody's opinions are valid. And I appreciate the respect that has occurred here today on an issue that can be emotional. I stand in opposition to this pipeline. I do not stand in opposition to energy development in the United States. I do not stand in opposition to jobs. This nation is desperate for jobs. We have nine percent unemployment. We have a Congress that would rather argue about nothing, and there is no sense of urgency to fix the problems. But other than the fact that union members are going to get a major gig, I can't say anything good about this pipeline. And I urge that it is taken off the books. I don't expect that's going to happen. My presence here today isn't so much for myself; it's for my grandson and the world that he is going to inherit because this nation is at a desperate crossroads, and we have some ugly choices. We have some other choices that are better for us, but we don't have a Congress that wants to do anything about that. But crossing this road and making a poor choice to get jobs that are temporary, largely, and going to go away is not acceptable. The thing about pipelines, I worked as an ironworker on power houses at Point of Rocks, Wyoming and down at Sioux City. Had a lot of fun at Rock Springs and worked with a lot of interesting people. But the thing is the job to build a pipeline will last a season, and they are going to be good paying jobs. But this is like being married and waking up the next morning to somebody you don't want to be with. I just want to back up a little bit here because I think facts are very, very important. But the Pipeline Safety Trust - and let's talk about the substance we're running through this pipe - the Pipeline Safety Trust, and there's been a lot of references to pipelines, crude pipelines largely and natural gas pipelines. But this is not the same thing, it's not even close to the same thing. Let's just consider what's going through this pipeline. The acidity level of conventional crude versus tar sands shows that tar sands has three to nine times higher acidity level, viscosity, thickness. It is more than 30 times higher viscosity. Sulphur content is ten times more than the regular crude going through all these pipelines that are built and maintained across our nation. The pipeline temperatures, and I heard somebody say something, and I think it was kind of an error about what it is. Normal pipelines, conventional crude, the temperature - - Oh God, you're saying thank you so soon. Just a second. - - runs about 100 degrees Fahrenheit. But because you're running thick sludge through these things, it runs up to 158 degrees. The pipeline pressure in normal conventional crude is around 600 pounds, and in a tar sands pipeline it runs 1,440 pounds per square inch. Abrasives, and this is the clincher, in conventional crude it is nil. That's why we grease our engines with it. With this Keystone XL, maximum capacity means over 125 pounds of quartz sands and luminous silicates - I think I said that right - are running through per minute. Compare that to common sandblasters, which run anywhere from 1.5 pounds to 47 pounds. We're talking about 125 pounds running through it, per minute. What we have here is the worst possible energy source, - particularly when you consider much higher carbon emissions from processing this stuff, and running it through the tailpipe - mined in the worst possible way, through the worst possible delivery system, over the worst possible course, for God's sake, the world's largest aquifer in our nation, in North America. And this thing is going to break. It's going to be highly problematic, and I thank you for your time.    
COURT REPORTER: He did not identify himself on the record.  
MR. STEELE: Excuse me?  
COURT REPORTER: He did not identify himself of the record.  
MR. STEELE: You are Richard Hauffe?  
MR. HAUFFE: Hauffe.  
MR. STEELE: Hauffe, Richard Hauffe.  
MR. HAUFFE: Sorry.  
MR. STEELE: Yes, let's move along please. Number 118, Brian Raines; 119, Robert Chastan and 120, Chad Gilbert please.  
MR. RAINES: Hello and thank you. My name is Brian Raines, business agent for Millwrights 548. I represent 600 members from South Dakota and Minnesota, and I would like to pledge their support to this project. Thank you for hearing me.    
MR. STEELE: Is Robert Chastan here, please?  
MR. CHASTAN: Thank you for allowing me to be here. My name is Robert Chastan, I'm the pipeline director for Local 49 of the Operating Engineers, covering South Dakota, North Dakota and Minnesota. I'm here today to support the line. I have heard many of the different sides to it. I've been working in the pipeline industry for 25 plus years, and out of those years, I have had an opportunity to work for TransCanada. I know firsthand the importance they take in environmental safety and all the issues. They go the extra mile. These jobs that people are talking about are temporary. I raised my family on these temporary jobs, and so do many thousands of my fellow brothers and sisters, raise their families. For those that say change careers, I say to them, why don't they change careers? I feel this is a safe way to get our oil, that we all know we need, and to get it from our neighbors is the best route to go. I live right, actually, within an hour from Canada. I've had the opportunity to go fishing in Canada and their brothers and sisters come over and fish in my area, I respect them. I am in full support of this, and I speak for many thousands of our members that are in support of this line. And I urge the politicians to move forward with this line that they got our votes to get them in there on. I fly my red, white and blue and my POW flag with pride. I'm proud to be an American. I'm glad right. And thank you for allowing me to come here and speak.   
Mr. STEELE: Chad Gilbert, please.  
MR. GILBERT: Mr. Steele, I would like to thank you and the State Department for holding this hearing, and send my greetings to Ms. Clinton. My name is Chad Gilbert, and I currently work for the membership of UA Pipeline Local Union 798 as a business agent for a large portion of the western United States. I have come to this hearing to represent those I serve who support the Keystone XL Pipeline. I would like to start by talking about what we do, which is the welding of the pipe and to inform you of the proud heritage our local has of doing the job right the first time. TransAlaska Pipeline and recently, the Ruby Pipeline. I can assure you we are the most qualified pipeline workforce and the best welders in bid, but the most environmentally friendly contractors in the world to date. I can assure you that this pipeline will be built with our commitment for safety to the environment of the communities it passes through. We do not leave a weld unless it is welded, knowing our responsibility to get it right the first time. We care about the concerns of the environmentalists, ranchers, landowners and the tribes because many of our members are all of the above. We hear your concerns, and we thrive on the challenge to build the safest pipeline in the history of our country. This pipeline is in the national interest of our country, which is in need of good paying jobs. We need a boost to our struggling economy. Why not use oil from a friendly nation, instead of a country supply. This pipeline will be built to higher standards than any job we have ever done. Those I represent lines in America were held to the standard this pipeline will have to adhere to. We, as a country, need this job for many reasons that I feel strongly outweigh the negatives. All of us in the room are a coalition for a better America. And I ask you not to allow the press or the extremists on both sides to divide us. Let's address our concerns and go to work to build the best pipeline ever built. The EIS report has plainly stated this pipeline will have little adverse effect on the environment. And those I represent trust and respect the report. We should and can work together to build a sound and a safe pipeline. Those I represent would request the State Department to approve this, hope and benefits for our country and our workers. Thank   
Mr. STEELE: I'd like to call please, Mr. Jerry Reisenauer, Ms. Kathryn Weller-Lena, Mr. John 
MR. REISENAUER: Good afternoon. My name is Jerry Reisenauer. I am the general manager of Grand Electric Cooperative Incorporated in Bison, South Dakota. I am also a lifetime South Dakota resident and a landowner in Western South Dakota. Thank you for the opportunity to address this group today. I'm here today to voice my support to the Keystone XL Pipeline. We have heard many comments on the pipeline today and a number of facts and figures. I believe that the Keystone Pipeline is important to the economic diversity in our area. Grand Electric will have the opportunity to serve three pump stations in Northwestern South Dakota. I, along with the Board of Directors of Grand Electric, believe that the pipeline will enhance the development of our natural resources and ensure the only ensure the sustainability of energy independence in our state and nation. We have heard many individuals address the need to be addressed and protocols implemented. I believe that the federal and state agencies have done their job and have and will place adequate restrictions and requirements on TransCanada to assure that the pipeline does not pose unreasonable risk or exposure. We have heard many individuals talk about the 20,000 new jobs, 470 million in new spending that will come to our state, an additional 10 million in tax dollars that will be generated. We have also heard why securing the supply of oil from a neighbor, trading partner and stable nation is far better than to continue to purchase oil from unstable, unfriendly Middle East countries. I agree with those comments. In addition to those positive things that the pipeline will bring, I'd like to spend a minute or 5 two addressing another aspect of the pipeline. That is what does the pipeline do for domestic energy production? In January 2011, TransCanada closed a 9 successful open season, which resulted in long term commitment of 65,000 barrels of oil per day that will be moved into this pipeline in an on-ramp that will be built near Baker, Montana. Those 65,000 barrels of oil will be pumped from the Bakken Formation within the Williston Basin, which is located in Western North Dakota, Eastern Montana and dips down into Northwestern South Dakota and the Grand Electric service area. In the September 22nd edition of the Oil Patch Hotline, which is an on line news letter that reports on the oil activity in the North Central United States, there were four facts and statements I would like to share with you. The first is, "In July 2011, a new record of 423,550 barrels per day were extracted from the Bakken Formation in North Dakota. The second is - Time? Okay. Second is if the 5 current rate of production increases, North Dakota could be classified as the third largest oil producing state in the nation. The third is according to North Dakota 9 Governor, Jack Dalrymple, within the next two years, North Dakota could be producing as much as 700,000 barrels of oil per day. If we indeed sent 25 percent of that oil down the pipeline, we will be sending 175,000 barrels of domestically produced crude oil down the pipeline daily. I would encourage you to approve the presidential permit and allow the pipeline to move forward. Thank you.    
MR. IVERSEN: Good afternoon, my name is John Iversen. I ranch about 40 miles southwest of here and the Keystone XL is going through about a mile of my land. I'm 100 percent against the route that it's taking. I think there's probably better ways. The U.S. State Department has shown that the tar sands could be moved by rail or tanker to refineries in 5 the eastern states of the U.S.. This would be a safer choice. It would still create jobs and help the economy. Most important, it would protect the Ogallala Aquifer and other water ways, which 9 provides water to millions of people. The unions have talked about the thousands of jobs it creates, but I'm talking about the millions of people that could be without water down the road. That's a big issue. I think the water quality is my big concern. I know that if TransCanada would step up to the plate and be 100 percent accountable for their spills, I wouldn't feel quite so bad. But my land, they're going to hide behind the state laws. The states, they're going to say, "You're a low priority area." They're probably going to clean up 85 percent of it, and I'm going to be stuck with the rest of it. It's not right. And the water situation, the Ogallala Aquifer. It's terrible to go through there. You're talking millions of people that could be without water, I mean, contaminated. 5 Most of you people have never been through a drought. We just went through one. This year was a tremendous year, but we went through six or seven years of drought in this state, and consequently, 9 look south, the drought they're going through right now. Water is a big issue. We, in this state and my county, we get our water right out of this river. We've got rural water, which we just got in the last seven, eight, ten years. The only thing that saved the cattle economy down there. Our dams went dry, we had no water. If it wouldn't have been for rural water, we probably would have been out of the business. Big issue, water. Big issue, my dealings with TransCanada, "You take our way or the highway." Pretty much. They bully you around a lot. I guess there is no guarantee that this oil is going to stay in the United States. I sure hope it does. If it's going across our property, it would make me feel a little better anyway. Some of it is probably going to be shipped abroad, I don't know. 5 I guess to the union workers, there seems to be a lot of them here today. If I'm correct, and I think I am, I think the steel workers were begging TransCanada to buy the pipe from them, and I think 9 they went to India and bought the pipe. Third rate pipe for a lot less money. You should have been there supporting them two years ago. And if there's some of you out there that need a job, I'll sure hire you because I work my butt off, and I'm getting tired of it. I could use some help.    
MR. STEELE: Is Kathryn Weller-Lena here and Jennifer Lena? If not, then we'll go on. I would like to please ask 125, Greg Dlein, Dlein; and 126, Mary Ann Bear Heels McCowan, please.  
MR. DLEIN: Good afternoon, my name is Greg Dlein. I represent the United Brotherhood of Carpenters and Joiners of America. And I would like to offer the full support of the carpenters union to build this pipeline. Thank you.   5 
MS. BEAR HEELS MCCOWAN: My name is Mary Ann Bear Heels McCowan. I'm a member of the Rosebud Sioux Tribe, and I am here today to say to Mr. Obama. Hea  means no to this project. 9 It has no future, and it has no future for our children. And if you think about it, all the South Dakotans who live here in South Dakota, it has no future for you either.    
MR. STEELE: Ms. Deborah Hanrahan, please and Ms. Candace Ducheneaux, please. Okay, again, Deborah Hanrahan and Candace Ducheneaux? All right, Ms. Kandi Mossett and Rodney Bordeaux please?  
MS. MOSSETT:  So hello, friends and relatives. My name is Eagle Woman, otherwise known as Kandi Mossett. I am Mandan, Hidasta Arikara, I traveled here today from North Dakota. First, I just want to stick with the facts here because I think that's what's the most important. TransCanada's own data supplied to the State Department states, "2,500 to 4,600 jobs will be 5 created temporarily for two years." There is strong evidence to suggest that a large portion of the primary material input for the Keystone XL, steel pipe, won't even be produced in 9 the United States. A substantial amount of that pipe has already been manufactured. You know, Keystone XL won't be a major source of jobs in the U.S.. Even if the figures were accurate, the Perryman Group study that was done, unemployment rate would remain at 9.1 percent. You know, in 2010, U.S. pipeline spills and explosions killed 22 people and released over 170,000 barrels of petroleum into the environment at a cost of 1 billion dollars worth of damages to the United States. When people talk about ethical oil, tar sands development has attracted investment capital from oil multi-nationals. Much of the tar sands oil will be refined in Port Arthur, Texas where the refinery is half owned by Saudi or Amaco, the state owned oil company of Saudi Arabia. I mean, everybody needs to stand back and look 5 at the reality of the situation that we're in here. The reality of the situation and the facts are oil is finite. It will end. Oil will run out, and here we are playing Russian Roulette with what's going to 9 run out first, oil or water. I fought the tar sands. I have friends that are battling cancer that can't be here because they are dying, because of what's happening in the tar sands. The most destructive project on the planet. You ought to go there to see the moon craters and see how bad it is. I'm from North Dakota where they are talking about this Bakken Formation, and I'm here to speak for those who can not speak for themselves. My friend Cassie was 23 years old when a semitanker crushed her. My friend Jordie was 21 years old when his accident killed him. And just this past month, a whole family was killed. Those babies were three and five years old; their parents were twenty one and twenty six. Don't tell me that these pipelines aren't killing people because I have I want to speak to Barack Obama, not as the President of the United States, but as one human being to another. Barack, you were born with sense dictates that you look at the bigger picture. We can not drink oil. As human beings, we are over 70 percent water. We were born in water. Water is life. Everybody needs to understand the fundamental problem, the big picture. Take a step back and see, just envision a world where divide and conquer isn't the way to get things done. I think it's ridiculous that they have people in here on one side and on the other side, when we are all human beings that all need to breathe air and drink water. There are so many older folks here who keep talking about the future. What about our kids? What about the youth? What about the future that you're talking about? Where are all of us? Most of the folks ain't going to be here, but I urge you all to think as traditional, indigenous peoples do. As a Mandan, Hidasta Arikara woman who Indigenous Environmental Network, I'm here to stand up and speak for all of those that can not speak for themselves. Athabasca River in Canada can't tell them, stop poisoning me, because they have sores and puss when you cut them open. And the elders eat them, and they get sick, and they die. This was prophesied you guys. That's the scary part about it. Seven generations ago and it's happening. Open your eyes. Wake up and see. There's two sides to every story, and people are dying. The only way that they can guarantee a spill won't happen in the Keystone XL Pipeline is not to build the Keystone XL Pipeline, and to move away from oil, which will run out, no question. Because there is a better way. And I'm here to tell you all today, use what's in here, in your heart. Use your mind and your morals, go at it from that angle. Not me, me, me, what I'm going to get now as a 4 landowner. Think about the next seven generations.    
MR. BORDEAUX: Good afternoon, I'm Rodney Bordeaux, President of the Rosebud Sioux Tribe. The 8 Rosebud Sioux Tribe, since the TransCanada Pipeline was started a few years ago and now the XL, we stand in opposition. We stood in opposition to the TransCanada, and now, we stand in opposition to the XL. And we are recommending Secretary Hillary Clinton, we are recommending to President Barack Obama to deny the presidential permit. This is based upon our oath that we took as a government official and as a tribal council. We have to look to our next seven generations. We are required to look out for them. And this pipeline and the impending disaster that people have talked about, that will come. We need to look out for our future generations, not only for our Indian tribes, but we support our neighbors that live next to us. We have a group here that we are supporting. The Keystone XL Pipeline goes through our treaty territories, 1868 treaty territories, and 4 also goes through the northern part of our reservation, the Rosebud Sioux reservation. We were not consulted on any part of the pipeline. The route that was taken went around some 8 of our tribal trust lands, and they did that because they did not want to consult with us. Section 108 of the Historic Preservation Act provides for consultation. We asked for that, and we were not given it. In addition, I'm a member of the Great Plains Tribal Chairmen's Association. The Tribal Chairmen's Association from North, South Dakota and Nebraska, there's 15 tribal nations within this region. We unanimously opposed the permit also. On September 16th, the First Nation's two Chiefs from Canada Northwest Territories and the Cree Nation out of Alberta, Canada, where the tar sands are located, they came to our reservation, and we had a meeting with them. And we joined forces. They told us all the problems they were having up there and what's going to happen to their lands. And they urged us to support them in their efforts. 4 We developed a Mother Earth Accord. It is going around here today, and it's basically asking all the signers, whether they are Indian, from Canada or the United States or any other citizens of this great 8 country, to stand up and protect Mother Earth. So, that will be a part of my message that I send to you, Secretary Clinton, up to the President. In addition, on the Rosebud, on our treaty lands as well as our reservation, we have a tremendous water source, the Ogallala Aquifer. We are on the northern tip of it. It runs all the way down to Texas. And if that's contaminated, it's going to destroy a very viable source of very good drinking water. In addition to that, to the south in Nebraska, also our former treaty land, is the Niobrara River. And we have had friends and colleagues that come to Rosebud and ask for our support, and these guys live right on Two Brothers Game, and they live right on the Niobrara River, north of it. And they are very afraid that should there be a rupture in this pipe, pristine river. Quality water, and under that lies the Ogallala Aquifer. We can not afford to lose this very valuable water source. the Mini Wiconi Water Project, which has water coming out of the Missouri into the northern part of our reservation, where we are not covered by the Ogallala Aquifer. And the Mini Wiconi Pipeline Project is administered and contracted by the Oglala Sioux Tribe. We also have Rosebud Sioux Tribe, Lower Brule, and we have the rest over in Jones County, and the Keystone is asking for right of way. And they met on Tuesday of this week, and they denied a right of way. So, there is going to be a problem, initially, right there also. And I know a lot of people talked about jobs, and I support jobs, and I respect the opposition, what they've said about having jobs, and I appreciate that. However, I ask that it not be permitted. The Rosebud Sioux tribe has a couple of wind farm in Northern Todd County, and also on the Nebraska border, we have a 30 megawatt wind farm with a tremendous opportunity for more wind getting any, I guess permits are, WAPA, the Western Area Power Administration, is not accepting any new development on their lines. So, that's a cleaner energy to be developed. Because what can happen, the potential for accidents is too great to really disturb a very valuable resource. Thank you very much.    
MR. STEELE: Next on my list, please, is Lynn Thunder Bull and then Richard Wiederanders. Is Lynn here, Lynn Thunder Bull? Then Mr. Wiederanders, go ahead please.  
MR. WIEDERANDERS: Good afternoon and thank you for this opportunity. My name is Richard Wiederanders. I'm 87 years old. I've been on this subject for a long time. Back in the 70's when I was teaching physics privileged to hear Amory Lovins, a Ph.D. in physics from England, who came over speaking for Friends of the Earth. And among the things he said was, has passed." He was right. They haven't built one since. He said another thing, that we really needed to learn to save energy as much as to produce it. And he is probably personally responsible for the fact that we insulate our homes so much better now than we did then. Building with two by sixes instead of two by fours. Amory Lovins has been, since then, head of Rocky Mountain Institute in Colorado, working to improve energy efficiency across the nation. He is one of my brains. His good book of the time was "Small is Profitable". His book looked at the fact that energy producing facilities would be getting smaller and smaller. We weren't building such big ones any more. And he looked ahead, and he said that the time will come when the typical energy have your own. And the energy that you produce will be from the sun. What it will do is put water into hydrogen and oxygen, let oxygen go. The hydrogen is when you combine it with oxygen again and produce pure water. I'm encouraged in the last year to see what has happened to the project since back in the '70s. I encourage you to get on the internet and put Dan Nocera, N-O-C-E-R-A, professor of chemistry at MIT. His subject is personalized energy. He has a lovely 20 some minute presentation about the world's energy appetite, about 16 terawatts. Do you know what a terawatt is? A kilowatt will run my chainsaw; 2 megawatts will run my town; 1,000 megawatts make a gigawatt; 1,000 gigawatts make a terawatt. And 16 of those will run the whole darn world. He says the only possibility for getting that much energy is hydrogen from sunshine. And the only byproduct of this process is pure water. Thank you.  
MR. STEELE: I'd like to call please, 136, Mr. Larry Gunderson; 137, Ms. Tori Cox Bartels.  
MR. GUNDERSON: My name is Larry work pipelines. And I don't know, after sitting here, what else could be said. We need to guarantee our future somehow, and I agree with both sides on the issue. And I guess we need this pipeline. In my view, if we lost all our importability, if we need oil and couldn't import it, we couldn't take care of ourselves. And that's about all I've got to say. Except that old guy over there was really good.    
MR. STEELE: Okay, again, Ms. Tori Cox Bartels, are you here? Then next, I'm going to call Mr. Rob Riess.  
MR. RIESS: Good afternoon, Mr. Steele. My name is Rob Riess. I'm president and chief operating officer of Sheehan Pipeline Construction Company. We are the nation's oldest pipeline 3 constructor, over years now in business. I certainly respect and admire everyone who has spoken before me. I respect and admire the fact that we all have our own personal beliefs and that 7 our great country affords us the opportunity to speak those. I am here in support of the Keystone XL Project. Our company has had a relationship with TransCanada for the past three to four years. We appreciate that relationship, that partnership, that we have had with them. But what I'd really like to address today, this afternoon, with the crowd is that at some point, the State Department will reach a decision. And in my case, I have already said that I support this project, and I hope that it goes forward. Which I refer to as phase 2. The Phase 2 of this project then lies on the people that were duly represented here in this room today. It lies on our company, Sheehan Pipeline. Should we be awarded some of this work, I can tell you, right now, that real facts, real numbers, that we will employ in excess of 2,000, somewhere between 2,000 3 to 2,500 people in our company alone. Just to help assist in this project. We really have four core values at Sheehan Pipeline, and these are four core values that are 7 supported by TransCanada. The first is training. We believe that you train the people to do the job the right way, the first time. The second is safety. We believe that every employee that comes out to our pipeline goes home the same way they showed up that morning, and not only the employees, but the general public, the landowners, the ranchers, the Native Americans, the people that we will touch, the people that we will impact as we work through this project. We talked a lot about pipeline failures. We talked a lot about leaks. Our company's core value number three is quality workmanship. We are committed to quality workmanship. It's something that we take a lot of pride in. It's something that we admire. It's something that we respect, the four Association, the Laborers, the Operating Engineers and the Teamsters. We, as a team, work to build these pipelines. As I said, we've been doing it for do. And we know that this is a tremendous challenge for us. And of course, the fourth and final core value we have related to the Keystone XL Project is environmental compliance. We understand the environment. We understand the sensitivities. We pride ourselves on trying to do that job the right way, the first time, and leaving the right of way, Mother Earth as it's been called today, in the way that it was before we ever showed up. Those are the commitments that I, as president of the company, have to live with. Those are the commitments that we make to the people that are represented here today, whether you're part of the project or against the project. As I said, we are in support of the project. Mr. Steele, and more importantly, the law appreciate you're coming out, and I thank you for the opportunity.   I believe it's Zaiko, and also Ms. Isabell Trobaugh? Again, John Zaiko and Isabell Trobaugh? Mr. Robert Freese and Mr. Kevin Solie.  
MR. SOLIE: Good afternoon, my name is Kevin Solie. I'm a senior environmental analyst for Basin Electric Power Cooperative of Bismarck, North Dakota. Basin Electric appreciates this opportunity to speak in support of Keystone XL Pipeline. Basin Electric is a regional consumer owned power supplier formed in 1961 to provide power to a consortium of electric distribution cooperatives. Basin Electric supplies 135 rural electric member cooperative systems with wholesale electric power, who in turn, serve approximately 2.8 million customers in a nine state area, including North Dakota, South Dakota and Montana. project because it will strengthen our national security. It is important to reduce our oil imports from the Middle East and other volatile regions of The Bakken Market Link provides a way to supply Americans with domestic oil from Montana and the Dakota's. In addition, Canada has a stable, democratic government that has strict environmental standards. The oil from Canada and from the Bakken will help us reduce our dependence on oil from countries that are hostile to the U.S.. Ensuring a secure supply of oil is of critical importance to our co-op farmers, ranchers and agribusiness owner members, who lead the world in agricultural production. This stable supply of oil will help shield us from price disruptions caused by events beyond our control, like the turmoil we saw in the Middle East earlier this year. Lastly, the environmental review effort was extensive and is consistent with the requirements of NEPA. Project impacts will be minimized within Basis Electric supports the pipeline and hopes that the State Department decides to approve the project as soon as possible. Thank you.  
MR. STEELE: Again, is Robert Freese here? Okay then, we will go on with Will Thomssen, please and Mr. Jason Maki. So, Will Thomssen please, and Jason Maki.  
MR. THOMSSEN: Good afternoon, Will Thomssen. I'm a member of the Local 49, and I think you've heard most every pros and cons today. So, my pro is let's get it done, and let's build it. Let's get it done now.    
MR. MAKI: Hello, my name is Jason Maki, and I came here from Wisconsin today in support of this pipeline. It's a lot of jobs; it's a lot of money. I'm an operating engineer through Local 49. I've taken the training course. Let's lay some pipe. Thank you.   and Glenn Drapeau.  
MS. SPOTTED EAGLE:  My name is Faith Spotted Oyate Dakota Treaty Committee of our nation, a member of the Cultural Committee, as an elder and a grandmother and a mother. I have a statement that I would like to submit, for you to take home with you, and I will give that to you. This is submitted on behalf of the Treaty Committee, representing the General Council of Ihanktonwan, the traditional tribal government body. We have an old time traditional government. We're not an IRA tribe. That's important for you to put that on the record. The Ihanktonwan, Nakota Dakota, Oyate are a nation of indigenous peoples of the western hemisphere, who through inherent birthright are sovereign and are part of a confederation of member nations commonly referred to as the Oceti Sakowin  7 Council Fires and referred to as the great Sioux Nation. in a bilateral agreement with U.S. Government and stated in a treaty made and concluded at Fort Laramie on September 17th, 1851. treaty lands, we can act and show act on any depredations occurring within the original indigenous treaty homelands by and through unanimous consent of the General Council of the Ihanktonwan . The General Council of the Ihanktonwan has the responsibility to ensure the preservation and protection of our people against infringement and depredation on traditional and historical lands within routes of the Keystone Pipeline Projects, particularly those things that have the potential to injure our grandchildren. The authors of this resolution were members of the Tribal Cultural Committee and the Treaty Committee. The resolution requested the need for a 100 percent traditional cultural property survey of the entire Keystone development corridor, as it cuts a swath through historic Ihanktonwan lands, and threatening the health of Dakota Nakota Lakota people's health, already infringed upon by diseases brought on by oppression. and the lawsuit was rejected. In the meantime, with the change of a Governing Business and Claims Committee, internal to the tribe, vested with day-to-day business, a TCP was conducted under the supervision of the BNC on a miniscule area of the Ihanktonwan territory. The Treaty Committee and the Cultural Committee of the Ihanktonwan reject this TCP, as it was never presented or approved by the inherent authority. Nation to nation consultation did not occur with the general council and was shabbily conducted without methodology. It is not recognized as part of the consultation process with DOS. The Section 106 process was violated. Despite the 106 process, the Ihanktonwan adamantly oppose any pipeline development by TransCanada or other oil companies. We join, as relatives, tribal relatives, in opposing the plan to pump this toxic crude oil from the tar sands of Canada through our aboriginal tribal home lands. in our history. We sit here with our nonnative relatives, who are farmers and ranchers. And for the first time, you are seeing something historic. That these two entities are standing together and they are telling you very, very clearly that the answer is no. And so, we welcome these people that have come from other places, and we have compassion that you are looking for jobs. But I come from a nation where we have probably the highest unemployment rate in the nation. But despite that, we're willing to sacrifice that. We live with that. In spite of that, we survive. We have beautiful families. But we are willing to sacrifice that for the survival of this land for our grandchildren and, ultimately, the environment. So, the jobs are not the presiding factor for 2 us, our grandchildren are. And I share those words with you as a grandmother. I'd like to submit, and this will be on the written one, on behalf of opposing this pipeline from a tribal relative in 6 Minnesota. Her name is Doctor Tiffany Beckman, and she is very, very concerned about the high rate of auto-immune disorders that are occurring in Indian country and development is occurring. The current word for it, of course, is environmental racism. Many of these developments occur near or on indigenous populations, and there is a high, high rate of auto-immune disorders occurring, like Lupas and Cancer. Being a Cancer survivor myself since 1994, one of the things that I have learned is that the only people who appreciate wellness are people who have been sick. The people who are well and looking for those jobs have no recognition of that. And this is from Doctor Beckman; she is a tribal doctor. "Benzene is a pathogen or toxin to all living things. Benzene can cause bone marrow suppression, Leukemia and other cancers. It seeps 2 through tissues and gets into our soil, plants and four leggeds and then into us two leggeds, and it stays there and causes health problems. We wonder why we have so-called auto-immune diseases at a high 6 rate, where our immune systems attack our own organs, joints and, ultimately, our body. It is our body's natural defense against the world of pollution like Benzene that our cells are responding too this. Benzene from this pipeline will make us sick and will harm future generations. It will wreck our food supplies, water and will eventually destroy the living." We ask you to take that very, very seriously, because it's nice to want a job today, to have that good car and that good home. But ultimately, we are here because we think in terms of seven generations. We are also speaking for our grandchildren. And many of those grandchildren are not yet born In conclusion, the Ihanktonwan Treaty Committee and Cultural Committees representing the General Council, which is an inherent authority of the in solidarity with the Sicangu Oglala Sisseton, First Nations and other tribal relative standing strong against this homeland. And I deeply Environmental Network, who represents many, many of our people. The DOS must clean their ears and hear us. We live here and do not want this for our children to inherit. It's important that you stop now, and you must listen. Your children will also be affected. It is natural law. We will submit this document. I've come here with my older son. On behalf of the Treaty Delegation of the Ihanktonwan Oyate, we hope that you will take this seriously. As an elder of my nation, I've come here to bring this message to you, and my son follows me.  Thank you.    
MR. DRAPEAU:  I come from the Ihanktonwan Nation, the Yankton Sioux peoples, located here in with the relatives here that you are in Dakota territory, and I come from and represent an indigenous nation of the Ihanktonwan peoples. And the Oceti Sakowin oppose the Keystone Pipeline and Keystone XL. We come here, as nations, to speak with one voice, to share with the Department of State and the Secretary of State, Hillary Clinton, along with President Obama, that we need to be heard with this, that we do not want this pipeline. And we are looking forward to the generations of individuals who have not been born, in that, this 1,700 miles of pipeline is going to be coming onto Mother Earth, and it's been stated that 100 percent avoidance of spillage and contamination of Mother Earth is that avoidance of building this pipeline. So, we ask that you hear that in that common sense, and also to share with your relatives. In 1851, the Treaty of Fort Laramie was signed, and we as Ihanktonwan peoples share this indigenous 1 territory as relatives with you relatives as good relatives. And with that treaty came 17.5 million acres that came all the way from Minnesota, Iowa, the Mississippi River, all the way over into 5 Wyoming, Montana, up into Canada, where this pipeline is now from, down to Kansas. And so, in May 28, 2008, at the inception of this pipeline, we opposed this, and we went into the judiciary system, and we asked them to not build this and to not consider this building of this pipeline. And so, now we're here to ask for the consideration of life. We don't need jobs. In order to have a job, you have to have life. And those jobs, if you are unhealthy and you are carrying these diseases that are caused by the carcinogenic atoms within this oil and the tar sands, that's something that is very detrimental. As a human being, we ask that you consider that with the Benzene contamination. And so also, we come here with a united voice of the Oceti to say that we oppose this pipeline, and we ask that you hear us on this.     
MR. STEELE: Next on my list, please, are Ms. Natalie Hand, and Ms. Lana Gravatt, Gravatt, 5 sorry. Natalie Hand and Lana Gravatt.  
MR. STEELE: Okay, yes please.  
MS. GRAVATT: Hello, my name is Lana Gravatt. I serve as the tribal historic preservation officer for the Yankton Sioux Tribe. I have held this position since September 2009, and a lot of it is consulting with federal agencies who are asking for federal funds to do projects within our ancestral lands. And it is pretty clear to this point that none of the federal agencies understand what the trust responsibility is, nor do they care; I don't think. And also the environmental impact statements, all those negotiations and consultations, those are meant to get projects through, not to protect anything, okay. You know the trust responsibility, there are many issues on that, but the main ones are health, 1 education and housing. And this being a health risk, I believe, as far as my opinion as a tribal historic preservation officer, let alone the history of this country with our tribes, you guys, well, the 5 Department of State would be in breach of that trust. You're putting the tribes in the position, we just came through a history of intentional genocide, and we survived it. You're putting us in a position where we don't know what to do. We don't have our places to practice our culture. That is it is the landscape. It is the water, the air, and it's all elements included. And if we don't have that, we don't have clean air and clean water, we can't exist. We can't pray to the Great Spirit. That's our communication, the environment. And if you are going to destroy the environment, I take that personally. As far as I'm concerned, what I heard today, South Dakota has spoken, and it has spoken against it. Everybody, the majority that did come and who are for it are not even from South Dakota. So you 1 need to look at that, and discount those votes if that's possible. And I have some veterans ask me, "How is it that a state is given authority to approve eminent domain for a foreign country?" How 5 is it that each state has it's own process, and what is that process? Nobody knows. Where is that information? That should be something that should be brought to the public, and the public should decide. Thank you.    
MR. STEELE: Next on the list, I have Debra White Plume please, and Michael Jandreau.  
MR. JANDREAU: You know so many words have been said here today that are important, I'm sure. Hopefully, those in opposition will cause the president and secretary to think about the real impacts that will occur to people. You've heard all of the issues. Those issues are real. They are not just figments of conversation. They are not just fillers. The reality of what can occur has been proven. The value of what has been said is real. The 1 environment and the impacts we have been subjected to. How are we impacted? We are impacted because our land will be used as a power source transportation line. That will create greater 5 hardship for us as an individual entity. We are not talking only for the purpose of talking. We are talking, hoping, that for once, just once, the federal government will recognize their responsibility, look at this issue and deal with it in the right and fair way. If it's not dealt with in that way, we will lose. We will lose as we have in every other federal agreement that we've had. So please, take into consideration our tribal views in this whole issue. Listen to us. Thank you.  
MR. STEELE: Before you go, would you state your name please, just for the record?  
MR. JANDREAU: My name is Michael Jandreau. I'm the Chairman of the Lower Brule Sioux Tribe.   
Mr. STEELE: Thank you very much. I 1 believe next on my list is Dennis Hemenover and following him is Russ Scherber, please.  
MR. HEMENOVER: My name is Dennis Hemenover. I represent Local 192 of the Local 5 Plumbers and Pipefitters United Association. I represent members in Wyoming, Western South Dakota and the Panhandle of Nebraska. We stand in support of this pipeline. I've heard a lot of things said today, and I obviously can not add any more to it, other than the fact that the membership I represent has experienced nearly fifty percent unemployment over the last two to three years, and these people need these jobs. So again, we stand in support of this pipeline. Thank you.    
MR. STEELE: Is Russ Scherber here please? Okay, I have next is Kevin Nelson and George Biggs, Nicholas Nemec, Terry Richards, please.  
MR. NELSON: Hello, I'm Kevin Nelson from Brookings, South Dakota, and I lived there 20 years. pipeline moves through there. And I was raised on a farm/ranch in Tripp county, and my neighbors who are still there support this XL Pipeline. I believe eastern oil and if it does not proceed, the tar sands oil will probably go to the Pacific and to China. And anyway, I just support this pipeline. The Northern Border Pipeline Company has operated natural gas pipelines in Eastern South Dakota for many decades, and I haven't heard any big problems with that. But I drove from Brookings, 190 miles. And just as long as we're still burning gasoline, I guess we need to find it and refine it. So, thank you.    
MR. NEMEC: My name is Nicholas Nemec, and I'm a rancher from Holabird, South Dakota. I'm also a former legislator for the state of South Dakota. When I was in the legislature, I always had a 100 percent pro union voting record, as judged by the you, in rural South Dakota a 100 percent pro union voting record is not necessarily something you advertise. But I had that record, and I was proud to have it. But I'm sorry to say that today I have to stand up in opposition to these hard working union people here. I'm concerned about pipe strength and the protection of the aquifers and rivers that the pipeline will cross. The Ogallala Aquifer is the largest and most important agricultural aquifer in the United States, providing irrigation water for millions of acres and drinking water for millions of head of livestock and wildlife and hundreds of thousands of people. In many places, the Ogallala Aquifer is within just a few feet of the surface. Placing an oil pipeline on top of this shallow aquifer is foolhardy and begging for disaster. The Keystone Pipeline that runs through Eastern South Dakota was predicted to have only one spill in 239 seven years. Instead, there were 12 spills in one year. A rate 84 times higher than predicted. Water is more important than oil. Please deny the permit for the Keystone XL Pipeline. 4   
MR. RICHARDS: Big Back Bear is my Lakota name and my Wasichu name or my government name is Terry Richards, and I'm a card holding member of the Oglala Sioux Tribe. Today, I drive from the Bighorn Mountains in Wyoming, and I am also a working man. But this ain't a good thing to do. This reminds me of 9/11, because you're going to allow a foreign company to come in here and contaminate our water and poison us. Isn't this what the terrorists have been trying to do for how long? You guys are crazy. When the money runs out of this job, where are you going to get you next job? I think it's time to start looking for something new. I come from one of the poorest counties in the country. I was raised poor. I'm uneducated, but 240 today, I own a home in Wyoming in the Bighorn Mountains. I'm the only one in my family that has gotten off the reservation without permission from this government and moved off the reservation, raise 4 a family. In Wyoming, all you've got to do is go look around Wyoming to see the damage that a pipeline could do. Look at the Powder River. Every cottonwood tree on the Powder River is dead because of methane. There's a place where I like to walk; it's an old ancient Indian campground with teepee rings. I go up there and walk, and there is a pipeline that runs right on the side of it. And the man, the rancher irrigates right above that pipeline, and when you walk through that field there's just oil all in that water. You can see it coming right on the surface. So, no matter how safe you say it's going to be, it's never 100 percent. And as a spiritual person, in my culture, I believe that we have people that can bring us water, make water out of dirt. So, to all of you people that are for this pipeline, we 241 ain't going to feed you this time. My people ain't going to feed you; we ain't going to give you water this time, like we did the last time you invaded our country and our shores.     
MR. BIGGS: My name is George Biggs. Thank you for holding this hearing in Pierre. I live here. I'm a Korean Conflict veteran and a 55 year, so far, member of the International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers. What does electrical work involve? The short answer is everything the light shines on. So, here I am. I came to Pierre to build the Owyhee Dam. About 3,000 guys worked on it over about 15 years; I got 9 years of it. Pierre was a boom town. Some bad elements were here, a tiny minority. People were here to work. I met my future wife here, got married and had four kids. I worked in other places, but Pierre was my home base. Some items that need to be addressed. I'll state right off the bat, I support building the pipeline. 242 Regarding the refinery. Why don't they build a refinery up in Canada? Well, we've got refineries down in Texas that are already built. The other thing is it takes about 15 years to build one. And 4 when you get it built, if supposedly it was built up by the tar sands, you would still need a pipeline to bring the oil down. Another item I think needs to be addressed is where money comes from. Where does new money come from? You know you can have a service industry where, say two guys, one cuts hair, the other shovels the snow and so forth, and they pass that dollar back and forth. Those guys, they have to buy groceries, and they have to buy gas and all the other things. So, elementary economics says that new money comes from agriculture, manufacturing and mining. Well agriculture, we know how that is. And we get to manufacturing, and we find a lot of our jobs have gone to China. When it get to mining, mining includes oil too. And you get this cheap energy, supposedly, out of the ground, and you can use it in 243 your manufacturing and anyway, everybody is better off. You've got to have that new money coming in. Money doesn't come from Washington. Washington gets its money from the people. So, we have here 4 the Owyhee Dam and Power Plant. This puts out cheap energy, cheapest there is, hydropower. And I'll get into another little thing here, on the windmills. They wind is blowing, sure. Anyway, with the windmills, they have these take or pay contracts. And WAPA, that's the Western Area Power Administration, administers these, and they've got to pay for the windmill power as long as the wind is blowing, whether they take the generation or not. Now, in the same line to give WAPA that chance to take the wind generation, and this wind generation is not cheap. It's very expensive. But it gets averaged in to the other power costs, so you don't notice it. But out here at the Owyhee Dam, right now they are spilling water out of the outlet tunnels and the generators, half of them or more, are standing idle. Does that make sense? Not hardly. 244 And then we get to man made climate change, that's a crock. Twelve thousand years ago, we had the last big glacier. After the glacier receded, which by the way, it stopped at the Missouri River 4 and backed up and made this Lake Aggesi on the edge of North Dakota and the tip of the northeast corner of South Dakota. A huge lake stretched through North Dakota clear up into Canada. The largest freshwater lake in the world. And it drained in different directions over the years. It was there for 4,000 years, and then it found its drainage through the Red River channel up into Hudson Bay and drained off in one year. That's climate change. Talk about risk. I almost got hit by a car yesterday, a woman driver. I was crossing the street; she made a short turn headed right at me. I couldn't get out of the way. She made the correction. And then we get another item on risk. These 12 oil spills that some people talk about, one of them had 20,000 gallons. That's a truckload. And suppose we had all these trucks go extra slow across 245 the roads that are involved with the Ogallala Aquifer? So, going a little further, the administration has avoided drilling new oil wells, has done all 4 they could to stop oil wells in the U.S.. In North Dakota, one of these oil companies is subject to a fine for like 28 ducks that died in one of their water pits anyway, contaminated water pits. Twenty eight ducks, but nobody says anything about the birds that are hit by the windmills. So with that, I'll call it good. Thank you.    
MR. STEELE: Ladies and gentlemen, I have reached the end of my list.   Hold on back there. It is entirely possible that I failed to call somebody's name. If you signed up, but for some reason I didn't call you, or you had stepped outside when I called you. If you would like to speak, if you have previously signed in, would you please come up, state your name and speak. 246 Okay. If there is anybody in the room, whether they signed up or not, would like to speak, then we would certainly be prepared to listen to your comments. Yes, would you come up and say your name, 4 so we can get it down? Yes. What is the name again, please?  
MS. DAVIS: Ila Davis, I-L-A.  
MR. STEELE: Davis?  
MS. DAVIS: Yes. I came today to listen and to learn. After listening - - I did not come to speak, I just wanted to learn. I am from Edmunds County, the Northern Natural Gas Line goes through our school district. It has a cooling station there. It's been there for years. It's been an asset to our school district. They have now, using the steam from the cooling process, and are supplying their own electricity for the plant and the excess goes to the power company as I understand it. We have highways. We have accidents. We have deaths. Does that mean that we shouldn't be driving a car? We shouldn't be on a highway? We need gas. We need this if we are going to continue with our cars. And it's going to take a long time before South Dakotans are going to be South Dakota winters. I'm in favor of this power line going through.    
MR. STEELE: Is there anybody else who would like to take advantage of this opportunity? Yes, please.  
MS. WALN: My name is Viola Waln.  
MR. STEELE: Could you repeat that, Viola?  
MS. WALN: Viola Waln, W-A-L-N.  
MR. STEELE: Okay.  
MS. WALN: I'm here representing Mother Earth. My tribal chairman spoke earlier this afternoon, from Rosebud. He talked about how our constitution mandates that we look seven generations ahead. That's something that my ancestors did. They looked seven generations ahead to me. So in following their steps, I look seven generations ahead to whoever is standing here in 150 years, if there is anything left to stand on. I hear a lot of people talking about how we need, we need, we need. I just want the Earth to petroleum products that I still think I need to use so the Earth can live, so that my descendents can stand here in 150 years and fight for the water and the air and the fire and the earth, because without these we won't have a life. Your grandchildren and mine, Mr. Steele, will not have a life. President Obama, Secretary Clinton, their grandchildren, their unborn descendants will not have a life if we continue to dig up the Earth and put in pipes and put in wires, just to take out these finite sources. They're not resources. They're sources, and they can't be replaced. A resource is something that we can replace, sources aren't, a source is a source. Once that source is gone, it's gone. So, I want my water. I want my air, and I want my Earth to be clean for my grandkids. Because when I pray, I pray out on the prairie, under the sun with no water, with the wind in my face. And I pray that my seven generations coming can stand there and pray on a clean prairie the way I have for all of my life, the way my 3 ancestors did. I think some people should think about what it's like to go without water for four days, because that's pretty hard. We take water for granted. It comes out of a tap. We drink it. We just drink it, spill it down a sink, throw it out, don't give thanks to it. How many people actually give thanks for the water? President Obama, Secretary Clinton, do you say a prayer for your water in the morning? Because I do. Most indigenous of this continent do. And that's why we're all standing up in protest. Because it's not about what we need, it's about what we want. We want our water to be clean for our children. Thank you all for coming to South Dakota, for spending time in our treaty lands today. Because as far as a lot of my people are concerned, the 1868, 1851 treaties are still in effect, still intact. We still look to these lands as something that we were put here to protect, and that's why we came here today. Thank you. 3  
Mr. STEELE: Now this today's meeting, this particular meeting is slated to go until 8:00 o'clock. So my colleagues and I will remain here until then. But it does appear like we have run through, certainly, the list of people that have come to this point. A couple of things I do want to reiterate. As you've seen, we have recorded all of your comments. We have accepted written comments from those of you who wish to leave them. And I suspect that a number of folks whose names I called had already left, and instead of waiting to make their comments orally, have written those comments on the information sheets that we provided and have turned them in. I want to assure you that whether your comments were made orally or whether they were given in written form or both, they will be factored into the decision. They will be considered as this decision process goes forward. Again, to this point in time, there is no decision. We called this meeting because we wanted 3 to hear from you folks as to your views about this pipeline. We recognize there are a multitude of those views. I think they run the spectrum from opposed entirely to entirely in favor of the pipeline. We will have to try to weigh them in the decision making process. In any event, we appreciate you all taking the time to come and to deliver your remarks, to convey them in written form. Again, you also have the opportunity, others that you may know have the opportunity to submit comments by fax, by letter, by e-mail or online up to October 9th. Up to October 9th. So, thank you all very much. It was a good set of meetings, I think there are good meetings. I appreciate all of your comments, and I would most particularly like to thank our local law enforcement authorities that stood watch over us all and helped to conduct the meetings in fine fashion.   Okay, so certainly, you're welcome to stay and keep us company, but you don't need to. But my 3 personal thanks to all of you for coming and for giving us your views. We appreciate it greatly. Thank you.    
MR. STEELE: For the record, can you state your name, please.  
MS. SCHOEN-CARBONNEAX: Laura Schoen-Carbonneax, CEO of the Pierre Area Chamber of Commerce. And I apologize for being late. I had conferences and business after hours and everything. So, on behalf of the Pierre Area Chamber of Commerce, I encourage Secretary of State Clinton to recommend President Obama approve the Keystone XL Pipeline Project. My report echoes the information you've already heard today about the need for jobs and independence from importing foreign oil. I would like to add a few more points for your consideration. We have an ongoing discussion in South Dakota about the need to add jobs, increase school funding and look for new revenue coming into the state. It appears this pipeline project provides momentum in the right direction in each 3 area. The pipeline would add an estimated 470 million dollars in new spending for our state's economy. It will provide additional state and local tax revenues of more than 10 million dollars. Some of which will go back to the schools. It will involve more than 5,100 person years of employment. For those who say these are temporary jobs, I submit a job, even temporary, is better than no job at all. On the local level, even though Pierre is not directly on the pipeline's route, we expect to benefit indirectly from the work being done. During the construction phase in Central South Dakota, there might be an opportunity for some of our local contractors to bid on and be awarded some of the work. Pierre is the largest community in Central South Dakota. During the construction phase, workers will need a place to headquarter. Even if Pierre isn't selected in that capacity, we expect to benefit from the workers' downtime. There is likely a possibility of our local hotels, restaurants, gas 3 stations and small businesses to benefit from the project during the construction phase. I asked a colleague in Aberdeen, South Dakota how her community faired during the construction of the Keystone Project in the eastern part of the state. Her reply was that, even though Aberdeen was 25 miles away from any of the construction, her community was, "One hopping place while work was going on." The company put their headquarters operation in Aberdeen, and many of their workforce chose to live and play there. Nearly every campground was occupied by recreational vehicles used by the work force. The food and beverage establishments, as well as the arts and cultural events, recreation events and all other forms of entertainment felt the impact of their extended presence in their community. Yes, this is temporary revenue. However, dollars to the businesses and tax revenue to our city go a long way, especially as many of our businesses and our cities up here in Pierre struggle 3 with how to pay for the millions of dollars it will cost to rebuild after this summer's temporary flood. This is one more point I would like to add, and this is more of a personal note. I'm a lifelong resident of South Dakota. I was concerned about the possibility of leaks in the pipeline, and I have the children, and I want them to have clean air and clean water and all those things that go along with it. So, when I heard that there were 12 leaks that had happened with the Keystone Project in my home state, I was a little concerned, and I did do some checking. Upon further research, I learned the total amount of oil from the spills was 37 gallons. The smallest was two gallons. The largest was twenty gallons. So 4 of the 12 leaks did happen in South Dakota, resulted in 37 gallons of oil spilled. None of which affected the ground water. And when you consider the large volumes of oil going through the pipeline, 37 gallons seems to be a minimal amount. For our local economy, for our state and for 3 our country, please approve the project.  
MR. STEELE: Thank you very much.  
MS. SCHOEN-CARBONNEAX: Thank you.  
MR. STEELE: Could we get the spelling of your last name please?  
MS. SCHOEN-CARBONNEAX: First part is S-C-H-O-E-N, dash C-A-R-B-O-N-N-E-A-X. 
Mr. STEELE: That's an interesting combination. Thanks a lot.    
MS. TROBOUGH: My name is Isabel Trobough, I'm from Elk Point, South Dakota. Go ahead?  
MR. STEELE: Yes, please.  
MS. TROBAUGH: I come before you today as a concerned citizen as to whether or not to support the second oil pipeline from Canada. As you know, oil is already being pumped through the first one in South Dakota. When the people of Union County voted in favor of building the first oil refinery in many years, which is six or seven miles north of the city of Elk Point, we heard the same rhetoric that you Every area that was mentioned in the brochures about how bad the air quality was going to be, we were able to disprove everything. We were told that in El Dorado, Arkansas, which has two refineries on the outskirts of town, a hazardous chemical waste incinerator and a chicken factory within city limits, the air quality was very bad. I received a seven year quality survey, which was monitored by EPA 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, with not one bad hour of air quality in the whole seven years. The water in the river that runs by there was also not contaminated. We were also told this would bring a high rate of Cancer. Well, 20 years ago in the southeastern part of South Dakota, we were called a hot spot for Cancer. At that time, we had no refineries, no pipelines. This pipeline will be built with the very latest technology and sensors that were not available before. Today, we have 12 percent less carbon in the air then we had 2 years ago. largest capture of carbon in the world at Bismarck, North Dakota. Over 17 millions tons of carbon have been shipped to Canada through a 206 mile pipeline. This carbon is being used in the mining of the oil and the tar sands. We need to become oil independent and get out from under the thumb of middle eastern countries. Once the Middle East realizes that we are serious about using our own resources and becoming independent, they will reduce their prices of oil and gasoline and the grocery prices will all come down. This will ba a great advantage to our lower income and senior citizens. With the high unemployment rate that we have today, this pipeline will provide a huge amount of good jobs, which will put many of our unemployed, who are begging for jobs, back to work. Can we guarantee that this pipeline will be 100 percent free of problems? Of course not. Nothing is 100 percent. Life itself is not 100 percent free 2 of risks. Are we willing to take the slight risk to become energy independent from countries that don't like us very much or at all? With the modern technology we have today, we have nothing to fear but fear itself. Being energy independent is a win/win for this great country of ours. Thank you for your time.  
MR. STEELE: Thank you very much, appreciate it.  
MS. TROBOUGH: I was part of testifying with an oil refinery in Elk Point, South Dakota, which has been approved. The air quality permit was approved the other day, 100 percent unanimously. Thank you.  
MR. STEELE: Thank you.    
MR. STEELE: Okay, for the record, would you please state your name.  
MR. IN THE WOODS: Good evening, my name is Bryce In The Woods. I represent the Cheyenne River Sioux Tribe. I'm an elected Council Representative on our Tribal Council, and the Wol 2  Lakota Chairman on one of our committees for our tribal government. And I'd like to direct my words to President Barack Obama and Secretary of State Hillary Clinton. For are hundreds, thousands of years my people have been here on this Turtle Island, and at one time, the land, the air and the water was actually a Garden of Eden. All benefited, all lived on this land. And our people, Wichita, Lakota Sisseton, and the Oceti Sakowin go all the way up to into Canada, and we cover a vast territory, as the treaties will recognize that, the 1851, 1868. And every since that time, it seems that there has been a constant taking, a constant giving, and for my grandfathers and great grandfathers and for my constituents and my people right now that are living on the reservation, our headquarters on Eagle Butte, and for the coming generations. Again, this Garden of Eden is not the Garden of Eden any more. And I'd like the President, Barack Obama, and Secretary Hillary Clinton to know that the concerns here are coming from the original 2 people of this land. And we see no benefit. We can see desecration of sacred lands. Water, the concern is water. When we had a conference call with the State Department and TransCanada officials in April, they were mentioning no spills. My concern was the way the Earth is changing. What is your contingency if there is an earthquake? And we have earthquakes in this area now. So, this is a warning that needs to be heeded by the Commander in Chief, coming from the original peoples. That they told us in April, there's no spills. The very next month my concerns were confirmed and spills in rivers. And that's a concern. We call it Mini Waconi, the water of life. This is constantly being polluted. So unless TransCanada and all those corporations, those multinational corporations, can clean the water for the things that are going to happen, that they are going to create, they need to be held accountable. Unless they can clean that water that they pollute, I respectfully request President Obama, Secretary Clinton not to sign that 2 permit. We oppose this second Keystone Pipeline. We've sent our resolution in, and I have another resolution here to turn in for the record. And it's kind of a hard day to see that again. There's pro's and con's, but coming from our people here, we are seeing things here. They call it rural America, but we're seeing things that need to stop now. And if it doesn't stop, then the people are going to suffer. And that's what this is about, the people suffering. We don't need that no more. I think America is greater than that, and I think there's technology there that needs to come out. So again, I ask for President Obama and Secretary Clinton to look at those patents that are suppressing technology that would be beneficial to mankind. And right now, it is for the greater good of mankind that I stand here before you, talking to the Secretary of State and to our President, that please, with a sincere heart, there has to be solutions today when there is something of our concern, like the water and what's going to happen 2 if this goes through. So, heed the warning. And there's many things I'd like to say. This land is asking, respectfully, to oppose this second pipeline and lead to what it is going to do the waters. And I thank you for the time, and I'll submit our resolution for the record from the Cheyenne River Sioux Tribe.    