UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF STATE  Keystone XL Oil Pipeline Project  PUBLIC COMMENT MEETINGS  4:30 p.m., Thursday, September 29, 2011 Teresa Hobgood and Michael Stewart, presiding officers.    P R O C E E D I N G S  
MS. HOBGOOD: Hello and good afternoon. I am Teresa Hobgood from the Department of State in Washington, D.C. My colleague, Michael Stewart, and I are here today to listen to your comments regarding the national interest determination for the proposed Keystone XL pipeline. On behalf of the Department of State, we would like to thank you for joining us at this public meeting in Atkinson, Nebraska. We recognize that this is an important issue and value your input. We would like to express a very warm appreciation to Mr. Bill McAllister, Superintendent of the West Holt Public Schools for opening up his facilities, and for hosting this meeting. Can we all give him a round of applause.  
MS. HOBGOOD: The purpose of this meeting is for you, members of the public, whether you are a teacher, a farmer or a scientist, to express your views on whether issuing a Presidential Permit for the proposed Keystone XL pipeline is in the national interest. To focus time and attention on your comments, we will not be answering questions, at this or the other public meetings that are taking place in South Dakota, Kansas, Montana, Oklahoma, Texas and Washington, D.C. Before we begin, we would like to describe the Department of State's role in the Presidential Permitting process, and lay out the ground rules for participating in this meeting. With regard to the role of the Department of State, in September of 2008, TransCanada Keystone Pipeline, LP, filed an application for Presidential Permit for the proposed Keystone XL pipeline. Executive Order 13337, signed on April 30, 2004, delegates to the Department of State the authority to issue a Presidential Permit for facilities such as the Keystone LX pipeline that cross the U.S. border. In considering a permit, the Department of State determines whether allowing the border crossing is in the U.S. national interest, taking into account environmental and safety issues, as well as energy security, foreign policy, and social and economic concerns. In addition to the Executive Order, the Department determined because of the importance of the proposed pipeline, that it should evaluate the pipeline's possible environmental and safety impacts consistent with the National Environmental Policy Act or NEPA. As a consequence, the State Department prepared an environmental impact statement or EIS consistent with NEPA to evaluate the proposed pipeline's potential environmental and safety impacts. In preparing the EIS over the past two and a half years, we have conducted some 41 public meetings along the pipeline route, and in Washington, D.C., to gather public comments in developing the scope and draft of the EIS. On August 26th, we released the final EIS, which addresses the more than 250,000 comments from the public comment period. The Final EIS is just one factor considered in the review process. It does not represent a final decision on the permit application. Now, as we move into the national interest determination, the Department of State is compiling additional information to determine if the proposed Keystone XL pipeline is in the national interest, and decide whether to grant or deny the permit. Now, turning to the ground rules. We hope to have the opportunity to listen to everyone who wishes to speak. And in order to allow the maximum amount of participation, we ask you to limit your comments to no more than three to five minutes. The amount of time you will be allowed to comment will depend on the number of people who have signed up to share their points of view in the national interest determination. Given the strong interest in this issue, it may not be possible for everyone who would like to speak to do so. If you do not have that opportunity, you can provide your written comments on the back of the sheet of paper handed to you before you entered the gym, or you can submit your comments via mail, fax, e-mail or online. The handout you received provides all of the instructions for the submission of written comments. Written comments will be accepted through October 9, 2011. With the exception of your elected officials, speakers will make their comments on a first come, first serve basis by assigned number. If you have an even number, please line up in the aisle on my left, and if you have an odd number, please line up on my right. We ask that you please be ready to speak into the microphone as soon as your number is announced, and state your name and any organization you are representing. As you speak, you will be timed. Our goal is to provide at least three minutes per person, but it could be more or less depending on the number of speakers we have. A card will be displayed when you have two minutes remaining, then one minute remaining and when your time is up. We respectfully request that you finish your remarks in the allotted time. Let me reiterate that the Department of State officials are here to listen. We will not be engaging in a question and answer session. We understand there are strong views on this critically important subject. You would not be present if that were not the case. We ask that in fairness to everyone concerned, those who wish to speak be allowed to do so without interruption. Please show respect to your fellow speakers and to those who wish to hear the heartfelt words of everyone. All oral and written comments will be considered as part of our record of decision, and will be reviewed by the Department of State during the decision-making process. All comments made here will be transcribed by an official reporter. Again, we wish to stress that the Department of State has not made a decision on this matter. Thank you for your interest, and for coming to this meeting. We'd like to start the proceedings with the elected officials who are present. We understand that Senator Annette Dubois is here, and I apologize if I mispronounced your name.  SENATOR DUBOIS: That's fine. I am Nebraska State Senator Annette Dubois. And I am first and foremost a farmer and rancher, but I represent Nance, Merrick, Hamilton and a portion of Hall County, so that's south and east of here, about 120 miles. I know I would like to echo the comments that you just made. There are very strong feelings on both sides of this issue, and those feelings are also legitimate on both sides of the issue. So I hope maybe today we can agree to disagree on many of them, but yet still be respectful of other comments that are going to be made. I'd like to start out by saying I'm not necessarily opposed to the pipeline. I'm certainly not opposed to the jobs that it will create, or the energy resources that it will provide. But I am opposed to the route that it will take through Nebraska's most sensitive ecological area, the Sand Hills.  SENATOR DUBOIS: Last year I cosponsored an interim study trying to find objective information regarding the specific project and what, if any, authority the State of Nebraska did possess. Since the conclusion of that study, it has become increasingly clear that states do have the authority for siting and permitting of these federal projects. The Tenth Amendment to the United States Constitution states that powers not delegated to the United States nor prohibited by the states are reserved to the states respectively, or to the people. Federal Statute 49 USC Subsection 60104 states, "This chapter does not authorize the Secretary of Transportation to prescribe the location or the routing of a pipeline facility." A congressional research memo further clarifies that, and I quote, "The Federal Government does not have siting authority for oil pipelines, even interstate pipelines. In the absence of Federal Government siting authority, state laws establish the primary siting authority for oil pipelines, including interstate oil pipelines." Montana and South Dakota have statutes in place that the Keystone XL pipeline project complied with. Nebraska is not so fortunate to have those same protections. I know there are many gray areas in this complicated issue. During our study we posed a series of questions to our state's water and soil scientist experts. The Sand Hills and the underlying aquifer has the amazing ability to transmit fluids at a rate of 100,000 gallons per day per foot, according to Dr. Ann Bleed, who's our former state hydrologist. The eastward slope of this aquifer leads to the drinking water wells of our state's two largest cities. These characteristics have helped our state become successful in many ventures, most notably agriculture. But it also makes us very vulnerable to contamination from any oil leak. A consistent concern that was stated by these scholars was the large degree of uncertainty as to the impact of this project on the aquifer and the Sand Hills vegetation. They are continually conducting research on the Sand Hills and the aquifer beneath this land to know and understand it better. Several of these state water experts have stated there is insufficient scientific research to accurately predict how leaking oil would behave in water-saturated soils of the Sand Hills. As I have listened to their presentations, it is clear to me this understanding and research is an ongoing process. Your EIS, as well as our university professors agree, that any leaks would be localized. To the federal government, that may appear to minimize any potential damage. But if you are in that locale, and your livelihood depends on that water, the damage will be anything but minimal. Several other Nebraska legislators are working with me to call a special session and pass siting legislation. That is why we are now asking for time. We only want what other states have already exercised and Keystone XL has followed. Further concern over your approval of the Presidential Permit for the Keystone XL project comes from the lack of federal oversight for oil pipelines. PHMSA, or the Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Administration, is charged with that particular oversight. Recent reviews of PHMSA give me pause in trusting them with our most precious natural resources. A U.S. Department of Transportation review of PHMSA disclosed serious deficiencies in how PHMSA processes and oversees special permits and approvals. They concluded PHMSA does not look at applicant safety history when assessing their fitness for approval. Even worse, PHMSA does not consider it a priority to complete risk-based oversight, including investigations and inspections. And the DOT review found all companies holding special permits were not complying with the conditions of their permits. According to federal reports, PHMSA is chronically short of inspectors and lack the resources needed to hire more, leaving too much of the regulatory control in the hands of the pipeline operators, themselves. While PHMSA is really working to correct these flaws, they have stated it will take many years for that to happen, and much needed resources. So I do thank you very much for taking the time to come and hear the people of Nebraska, and I strongly urge you to give the utmost consideration to the testimony, to these people who live and work on this land, who are invested body, mind and soul, and know it better than any analyst or scientist. These are the true experts who have lived here for generations.  SENATOR DUBOIS: They have experienced firsthand the harsh realities as well as the great blessings of caring for one of the most fragile ecosystems in this world. So in conclusion, I echo the points that my colleagues, who spoke to you in length earlier this week, about the need to deny the Presidential Permit in order to give us time for reconsideration. Thank you.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Now if we can hear from John Sieler, the State Board of Education.  
MR. SIELER: Thank you very much. My name's John Sieler and I serve as an elected member of the Nebraska State Board of Education. I want to thank you and the State Department for coming to Atkinson, Nebraska, today. And I want to thank everybody who came to speak or to listen to the testimony. I think this is an important part and a great show of our democracy in action. I speak as an individual. I don't represent the opinion of the Board, and we've not taken a stand one way or the other. But I personally am in favor of the current pipeline as it is proposed, and I support it for two reasons: Energy independence from Middle East oil, and for economic growth. This pipeline would create jobs in Nebraska, approximately 7,500 in this state alone, and in our nation about 120,000 jobs will be created from this project. We'll have jobs during the construction, and the jobs will continue after construction. This will bring revenue into the state from salaries paid to the workers, from property rights. Other things, money will be spent for motels, food, entertainment, and it will increase Nebraska tax revenue during the project and also after the project, probably about 11 million dollars or more additional revenue to the state of Nebraska. I encourage you to approve the Keystone XL pipeline as currently proposed. Thank you.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you.  
MS. HOBGOOD: I understand Senator Ken Haar is here.  SENATOR HAAR: Thank you very much. Not only for the opportunity of being able to speak, but the opportunity to drive up here today. It was just gorgeous. I'm going to wear a hat given to me by one of the experts that Senator Dubois talked about. His name is Francis Henry, and he's been drilling water wells in this area forever. The picture on here is a little man standing beside a gusher of water, imagine that. Well, everywhere I go in the state farmers, ranchers, small business owners, average citizens come up to me and say, you know what, we're really apprehensive. We support the pipeline, but why would we put it over the aquifer. This is a quote from our governor in yesterday's Journal Star. Another quote from our governor, and this is from September 22nd, the Omaha World Herald. "I emphasize very candidly and directly to TransCanada officials that I supported a change in the route," Heineman told reporters at a press conference, "I don't think they're going to do that." And then in another release from September 1st in the Omaha World Herald he said, "Deny their permit and change the route. It's a route that could potentially contaminate our water supply. We don't want to do that." Well, I also have some quotes here, Senator Johanns, U.S. Senator Johanns, "They've picked the wrong route. I wish I could tell you that manmade things never break, but they break. Why would you want to dump oil into the aquifer?" And U.S. Senator Ben Nelson, "State officials need to protect the Ogallala Aquifer and choose a different route. The current route puts the Ogallala Aquifer at risk and lacks support in Nebraska."  SENATOR HAAR: And then Senator Fortenberry -- I'm sorry, Congressman Fortenberry had similar comments. And then back in January, 21 state senators signed a letter and it ends this way: "We strongly agree with Senator Johanns in urging the State Department to consider a route that avoids the Sand Hills and minimizes exposure to the aquifer." So I guess you could say some pretty important Nebraska politicians think we ought to have a different route. So my message to the State Department is the majority of Nebraskans oppose the pipeline going through the Sand Hills. Now I want to speak to the people of Nebraska. We have asked politely. We have asked TransCanada to move the pipeline. We've asked the State Department to delay or deny. And in a meeting I had with Under Secretary, Dr. Jones assured me that the national interest does include state interest, and that the decision has not been made. So now what? Okay, we have some options. One, we can sit and wait for the U.S. State Department to act hoping that State says no, and we have time next session to pass a siting law. But, if the permit to cross the border is approved and we have no siting law in place, then TransCanada will float the Keystone pipeline right through the Sand Hills and take care of us when it leaks. That's a comforting thought. And by the way, just an aside, in the State Department's own FEIS statement it says that for 65 miles of the route through Nebraska, that the water level is an average of ten feet or less. Ten feet or less. Most of that is in the Sand Hills, some of it's down by the Platte River. So do you like Option 1? I don't. Or Option 2. The legislature can step up to the plate and enact a siting law before State Department acts. And I think we prefer Option 2.  SENATOR HAAR: Do we have the authority; yes we do. Senator Dubois covered that. Can we wait; no we can't. We know that if we don't act before the end of this year, the likelihood is that the pipeline will go through the Sand Hills. So the most important question at this point is, does the legislature have the backbone, or courage I guess is a better word, to act. Senator Dubois has the courage. And the Senator Tyson Larson from this area has said he will support a special session. I want to thank him for that.  SENATOR HAAR: There will be a call for a special session, and those results will be made public. There's no ducking this issue. So I want to ask you to call your state senators and ask them to support the call, and thank them if they are. Call your friends, tell them to do the same. This is an historic moment for the Nebraska Legislature to step up to protect the citizens of Nebraska, and Nebraska's most valuable natural resource, which is water. Thank you very much.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Now can we have speaker number one, speaker number one come to the microphone. And if speaker number two can come to the microphone as well.  DOUG SEA: I'm the president and training director of Local 1140 in Omaha, Nebraska, where I work and live. I think you can think of me as a teacher or principal, or an academic being or a career counselor. I'm committed to teaching men and women going through our apprenticeship program so they can get work building your roads, your bridges, your schools and more. I'm proud of my students, which I call apprentices. And I'm proud of the curriculum that we have developed. My instructors and I have trained hundreds of pipeline workers throughout the years. The people in pipeline construction, and right now they're -- the people I've trained in pipeline construction are working all over the United States. They're in great demand. And other members of our labor union have and will talk about the specifics of our training program. But I as a training director, want to make a special appeal to the State Department to recognize the quality of the construction craft laborers that we put into our work, and especially our work at the training center in Omaha, and training centers across the Midwest. I hope you will have the confidence in our working men and women to approve this pipeline and let them get back to work. Thank you.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Speaker number two.  STERLING SCHULTZ: I am Sterling Schultz, retired professional engineer, Naper, Nebraska, and an elected board member of the Lower Niobrara Natural Resources District. I am speaking today on behalf of the Board. Comment one. The Lower Niobrara Resources District has been unanimously opposed to routing the Keystone XL pipeline across the Nebraska Sand Hills and underlying Ogallala Aquifer since the very beginning of the public review process.  STERLING SCHULTZ: Protection of these two natural resources is absolutely essential to Nebraska's present and future agribusiness, recreational pursuits, industrial and commercial growth, and municipal and local drinking water supplies. There are pipeline routing alternatives acceptable to us. SCS-8 and the Keystone Corridor Alternatives 1 and 2. Detailed cost comparisons were ignored, and simply estimated at a 25 percent cost increase. DOS did not factor in the cost savings from constructing the XL pipeline in or parallel to the existing Keystone pipeline right-of-way. Savings accrue from eliminating the unknowns and surprises by building again in previously studied and completed right-of-way; from using the same emergency response plans, materials and personnel for both pipelines, savings from colocating maintenance crew facilities, material storage lots and sites for pumping stations and storage tanks. Across the states of Montana, North Dakota and South Dakota the proposed route avoids crossing Indian Reservations, wildlife refuges, federal lands, and environmentally-sensitive areas. In Nebraska, the TransCanada-proposed pipeline route crosses areas that are very sensitive to us; the Sand Hills and the Ogallala Aquifer. Why did they cross these? If the proposed pipeline route is not issued a Presidential Permit, TransCanada threatens to cancel the project. So be it.  STERLING SCHULTZ: Another firm will build a pipeline acceptable to us. In today's competition for world oil markets, the Western Canada Sedimentary Basin needs to move its vast supply of tar sands crude oils to refineries where it can be processed. PADD 3 in Texas is currently refining and exporting those products now. We, the Lower Niobrara Natural Resources District, and our constituents are not against building the XL pipeline. We object to where TransCanada insists on constructing it. There is a need for a pipeline to transport crude from Canada to Texas, located where it doesn't threaten the natural resources that support our Nebraska's economy. Common sense should trump TransCanada's pipeline construction and operating costs.  STERLING SCHULTZ: Comment two. It is a surprise to see so many proponents for the project that have been bused in here today. I am told even from Illinois and other states. Each of you may be out of work and looking for a job. We understand your need to get back to work. Construction and operation of the XL pipeline might just do that. The fact of the matter though, is you will go anywhere in Nebraska where TransCanada locates the pipeline, and you'll go there to get the job you want. On the other hand, we Nebraskans are stuck with the consequences of a crude oil pipeline located in the Sand Hills and Ogallala Aquifer. These resources are absolutely critical to Nebraska's jobs and economy now and in the future.  STERLING SCHULTZ: I would like to add my third comment because it is a little different approach, and I thank you for that. We ask that before a Presidential Permit is issued for Keystone XL pipeline, that it be irrevocably linked to U.S. congressional legislation that officially funds the Pipeline Hazardous Material and Safety Administration to do its work professionally, of insuring the safe and secure movement of hazardous materials. The FEIS repeatedly states the XL pipeline project will be constructed and operated in accordance with all regulatory requirements, including the 57 project-specific special conditions developed by PHMSA. TransCanada repeatedly agrees in the Final EIS to comply with all rules and regulations. Therefore, PHMSA must be adequately funded. Performance records both for the Agency and for private oil industry, have not always lived up to expectations. In closing, the Lower Niobrara Natural Resources District serves the common interest of all Nebraska, protecting life, protecting property, protecting the future.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Speaker number three.  JOHN McCOLLISTER: Thank you for the opportunity to speak. My name is John McCollister. I'm the Executive Director of the Platte Institute. We're a nonprofit, nonpartisan free market think tank, and we promote individual responsibility, limited government and free enterprise. And our support of free enterprise is the reason I'm here in support of the Keystone XL pipeline as proposed. In an effort to secure America's energy independence from foreign exports, there must be a viable link for America to take advantage of growing supply of Canadian oil. TransCanada has proposed a 1700-mile expansion to the Keystone pipeline already in operation as you know. In addition to significantly reducing our need to import oil from the Middle East, Nebraska stands to reap significant economic benefits with more than 150 million dollars in new tax revenues. The State will have more funds available for infrastructure projects such as road improvements, expressways and schools. Despite significant economic and energy security benefits at the national and state level, there are opponents of building a pipeline in Nebraska. Unfortunately, many of the critics are either misinformed or worse, intentionally misinforming the public in order to advance a political agenda. To be clear, many critics of the TransCanada XL pipeline are not opposed to the pipeline or its route, they're actually opposed to further development of Canadian crude as an American energy source.  JOHN McCOLLISTER: Nebraska's currently caught in the middle of an ideological fight. The debate is not necessarily about the Keystone XL pipeline, itself, but what it represents to various political factions. Consider which organizations are opposed to the pipeline and funding the campaign against it. Sierra Club, Audubon, Green Party, Nebraskans For Peace, and Bold Nebraska. What these organizations have in common is a desire to end America's dependence on oil.  JOHN McCOLLISTER: Special interests are at the center of this debate, not the particulars of the pipeline, oil sands or safety. The Green movement is assembling against the Keystone XL pipeline just as one more front in the war against oil. Examples of their actions are staging sit-ins and arrests outside the White House, which requires the time and resources of law enforcement paid by the taxpayers. The proposed Keystone XL pipeline incorporates new technology and the latest safety procedures, which makes transporting oil through the pipeline the safest and most energy-efficient choice. Jobs, security and safety are important to Nebraskans, which is why I ask you to support me in supporting the construction of the Keystone XL pipeline.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker number four. And before you start, may I ask if you can speak directly into the mic so that everyone can hear you.  LLOYD KNOX: I'm Lloyd Knox. I was the old petition carrier for property tax relief amendment, and I am a rancher from Holt County. I treasure our water real highly. We do not want the pipeline to cross the Sand Hills of Nebraska. If our government allows this to happen, they might take our water also. No right-of-way, please. An oil leak is dangerous to our water supply. I and many others will donate money for a refinery in Canada just to keep it out of --  LLOYD KNOX: -- Nebraska. Thank you.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker number five.  TOM GROSS: Hard act to follow. My name is Tom Gross, I'm a special representative of pipeline and gas distribution for United Association of Journeymen, and Apprentices of Plumbing and Pipefitting Industry of the United States and Canada. Thank you for allowing me to address this hearing. I represent 340,000 members of the United Association, along with their families. The UA as my organization is known, provides the highly-trained craftsmen and women who build everything from homes, schools, hospitals, to power plants, manufacturing facilities. And our members will be constructing the Keystone XL pipeline. It is important to the United Association that everyone understand that the security of our environment is and will continue to be an important concern to us. We are deeply committed to preserving our air, water and natural resources for future generations. We also know pipelines have already been shown to be the safest as well as the most economically viable and environmentally secure way to transport oil. I have seen firsthand the construction of pipelines throughout North America, and I can tell you that when the UA is involved, you can rest assured that we will build it with the utmost skill, integrity and commitment to safety. The UA spends more than 200 million dollars a year in training our members to do this work. The State Department is correct when it states the Keystone XL pipeline will have minimal environmental impact. The route has been carefully prepared and rerouted to insure that the fragile aquifers will not be disturbed. This project will continue the tradition of environmental integrity that UA and our signatory contractors have demonstrated for many decades. Keystone is the most scrutinized project in recent memory. I can think of no project that has been reviewed more thoroughly than this one. That's fine with us because we know that this project will be safe and environmentally sound. That's how we build all of our pipelines. Four of the most important questions facing our nation today are: How can we create more jobs? How can we increase our energy supply while reducing our dependency on oil from the Middle East? How can we further insure our national security? And how can we do all this and still protect our environment? The TransCanada Keystone pipeline project can help answer all three of those questions. So perhaps another important question should follow: How can we say no to a project that will go a very long way in answering all these questions? The reality is we cannot. Creating jobs and enhancing energy independence and proving [sic] national security, the Keystone project will do all of this and more. Please support this important project for all Americans. Thank you.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker number six.  CINDY MYERS: I'm Cindy Myers. I'm a resident of Holt County. I've been anticipating this day thinking that these words could be some of the most important words of my life. I truly believe this is the most pivotal decision in the history of Nebraska. This decision to be made by State Department officials miles away in D.C. could very well transform Nebraska into a devastating industrial wasteland. This is not the legacy I want to leave future Nebraskans. I want my descendants to enjoy the water I am so blessed to drink, direct from the Ogallala Aquifer. It's not filtered and it's not treated. The Ogallala Aquifer waters saturate to within inches of the surface throughout Southwest Holt County where this pipeline will cross. This is the most pristine water in our country, but yet the most vulnerable to contamination because of the high water table and the sandy soil. Keystone XL pipeline will actually be completely immersed in the aquifer waters in Holt County. Only water-saturated sand will separate this toxic mix from the deeper water that we drink. The pipeline will not be crossing the Ogallala Aquifer, it will be gushing through the aquifer. It is not very comforting to me that poisons such benzene, mercury, arsenic and lead are separated from our water by a half inch of steel. Pinhole. What a misleading term to describe the very small leaks not detected by the monitoring equipment that can actually spill several barrels of this toxic mix into our drinking water daily. Dr. Stan Sperry, a UNL scientist, did an independent study describing a plume of benzene contamination 15 miles long in our groundwater posing serious health risks to our people. I spoke with Brad Vann, an environmental scientist. He told me he would be concerned also if he had a drinking water well downgradient from a petroleum source, and he would want to know specifically what safety protocols are being employed to insure that a release has not occurred, such as routine testing. Because it only takes five parts per billion of benzene in water to make it undrinkable. You can't taste, see or smell it, and you can drink it unknowingly. It requires lab analysis to detect these minute amounts. What provisions have you made for testing our groundwater? The numerous real wells used for people, livestock and irrigation are not monitored by any public utilities entity. Who will bear the financial burden for this testing? How can we safely drink this water once the pipeline is in place? The people of Holt County shouldn't have to sacrifice their drinking water for some short-term economic boost, or to provide jobs for people living outside the area.  CINDY MYERS: A contamination plume in our groundwater could very well destroy the livelihood and jobs of several people living here. It seems the idea of money is factoring in more heavily in this momentous decision than concern for the health and welfare of people. Shouldn't people be considered the most valuable aspect of our environment? Shouldn't the welfare of human beings be the primary focus in an environmental impact statement? Allowing poisons to infiltrate our drinking water undetected, unmonitored, to me is a crime against humanity. The idea that --  CINDY MYERS: The idea that this tar sands oil gushing through the largest reservoir of freshwater on our planet will pose little environmental risk is absolutely ludicrous. The only explanation to this absurd idea is the connection of big oil money with the EIS, State Department and other leaders.  CINDY MYERS: The actual water experts are the people of Holt County. These are families who have lived here for generations and they love their land, and they love their water. We know the serious risk and the permanent devastating consequences of the spill into our groundwater. We don't want to risk our water, land and people for the sake of a foreign company's profits. The Keystone XL is in the interest of governmental officials influenced by big oil, and it's also in the interest of a foreign company desperately wanting to get this oil on the world market. This is not in the national interest for Americans, especially Americans living in Holt County, where we value our number one resource, our very priceless water. Thank you.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Speaker number seven.  RANDY MILLER: Yes, ma'am. My name is Randy Miller. I kind of wish it was Randy Thompson, but it's not. This is my first trip to Atkinson and Holt County. I'd like to say a couple of things. We've been in these meetings across the country, through this corridor. In my home state of Oklahoma this pipeline will pass close to where my family's grazing operation still exists. It will pass across the lands of the Chickasaw, the Choctaw, the Osage, and perhaps the Cherokee. In Texas it will cross the Carrizo-Wilcox Aquifer, an incredibly pristine and vital source of water in Texas. There are people there that feel like the folks here, they don't want it there. And they're like the folks here, they're speaking out. The same in my home state. I am an environmentalist. I have been for 32 years. I'm here on behalf  of and with Pipeliners Local 798 and the UA, and specifically with respect to Pipeliners Local 798, the welders and the journeymen that will build this pipeline, weld it together, and do their very best with their hands, with their skills to build the best pipeline that American labor can build. They are here for jobs. To say they've been bused in like cattle is an unpleasant and unkind thing. These folks need something in Oklahoma someday, and they may, they may not find that we agree with them but we'll be courteous and respectful to them when they voice their opinions. Everybody's here for something, jobs and the opportunity to work happen to be those things that bring us to Atkinson today. If I run one second over I want you to please tell me. One other thing before I leave this topic. I had a chance after the meeting in Lincoln, to meet Mr. Randy Thompson. I was curious who the -- you know, I stand with Randy. I knew it wasn't me, but I was wondering who it was, so I got a chance just to say hello. And those people that feel like yelling at their guests or their out-of-town spokespeople, people that are here to talk to the nation, feel like yelling or booing or calling out names like liar, or laughing, ask themselves, what would Mr. Thompson do if he's their spokesman. I've met him, he's impressive and I think everybody here should say, what would he do if he were the one that felt like treating the individuals here today like that. Today when I drove in, the very first thing I saw in Atkinson was an ethanol plant. An ethanol plant sitting right outside of town, it's a large one. Ethanol is trucked from Atkinson in Holt County all the way to refineries certainly in Port Arthur as well. There it is blended into fuel, and it is brought back here. I stopped our vehicle and filled it up at a BP gas station. That ethanol comes back as a blend in our fuels here. It is highly toxic in fuels. The mixture of ethanol causes fuel to spread in the sand. Thank you, sir. So consequently, a community can embrace things that it may not like. It may not fit perfectly in how it sees itself, but it provides jobs. There must be a lot of people that work with that plant, that drive trucks that carry that ethanol. But here it sits. And the thing that I noticed, that really caught my attention in the home of the West Holt Huskies is that it said on the side of that plant, in a big banner, "Fuel For The Future." And that's what we're here talking about. We don't want -- listen, the Sand Hill corridor for this pipeline is not something one person here with these unions chose. If it was moved or bent or curved, we understand. It's coming through some of these folks' homes in Texas and Oklahoma. I understand, that's the discussion. For us the issues are jobs, the environment, absolutely the safety and stability of this nation. We have a flag here that reminds us how precarious the lack of fuel and the dependence on foreign countries can be. So those are our issues, and the future is the biggest issue of all. We believe that the jobs are important, the environment is important. If this gets moved, as somebody said, we will still build it. We've looked at TransCanada's proposal. We hired our own people to look into the environmental aspects of it. We're not told what to do. I don't know any TransCanadians, but I do know the environment, and we believe that this can be built in a way that's safe and sound. Compared to all the uses of the Sand Hills, it will fit in and be consistent with this community's needs. Thank you.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker number eight. Can you speak into the mic.  BUD PETTIGREW: Hello, thank you for coming. My name is Bud Pettigrew and I'm the Executive Director of the Minnechaduza Foundation in Valentine, Nebraska, the heart of the Sand Hills, around 90 miles west of here. And before that, I was a high school history teacher for 25 years, and I taught in a variety of places throughout the state. But when I got a chance to go back to my home in Valentine to raise my boys in a place that's unspoiled, pristine, and not much different than when I was a kid, I jumped at that chance. I never dreamed that I would face a threat from a foreign corporation for the safety and security of myself, my family, my friends and my neighbors. And I urge the State Department to look into that situation immediately.  BUD PETTIGREW: During the time that I was a teacher, I was in a union all those years. And during that time period, I found out that when someone is more powerful than me, and more important than me, they will make unbelievable promises that are frankly unbelievable.  BUD PETTIGREW: So I urge the State Department of the United States of America to fight for America, to fight for all these patriots in red shirts who came here because they believe that their government will do what is right for them and not what is right for foreigners.  BUD PETTIGREW: Because when these foreigners leave and they take their money and our health and our water with them, there's nothing left for us.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker number nine.  BERT FISHER: Thank you, madame. My name is Bert Fisher, I'm a geologist and environmental scientist. Just a little credential. I have a Ph.D. in earth sciences from Case Western Reserve University, and a bachelor's degree in geology and geophysics from Yale University. I'm a certified professional geologist with the AIPG, and a registered professional geoscientist in the state of Texas. I've had 38 years working in geology and environmental aspects throughout, and the last 21 specifically working on pollution matters. I'm experienced with the oil and gas industry, in working with legal matters as a consultant, and in academia. I still am a research associate at the University of Tulsa, and I sometimes teach petroleum geology when they need me. I have no association whatsoever with TransCanada. And my clients include Native American Tribes and citizen groups concerned about water resources and pollution claims. In this matter I was retained by Pipeliners Local 798 to evaluate environmental geoscience issues as they pertain to the Keystone XL pipeline. Three other qualifications. I live within a mile of a very active refinery in Tulsa, Oklahoma. I live in a state that is crisscrossed by pipelines. I probably walk over one or two daily, and we certainly are still an oil and gas-producing state. In my review of this pipeline matter, wherever it is built it will be safe. The best technology will be used. Really significantly with respect to pipelines, it'll be buried deeper than is typically required of such lines. It'll be buried in most instances 48 inches, four feet below the surface, and it will be built by skilled and well- trained workers. The oil that this pipeline carries is nothing new, although some say it is. It's very similar in composition to California, Mexican or Venezuelan heavy crudes, and that's with respect to both its hydrocarbon constituency as well as the metals that are carried in it. More importantly, it's a very high viscosity oil. It's going to have viscosity somewhere in the neighborhood as blended like 40- weight motor oil. There was mention earlier that within the aquifer, fluids can move hundreds of feet a day. Really the specific statement would be water can move that far every day. Oil will move, this oil will move more than a hundred times more slowly simply because of its viscosity. There was mention of the pipeline being in the water and sometimes water-saturated sands. That actually is a good thing with respect to oil mobility because oil has to displace the water to move. It's a very hard thing to do. The route. The current route crosses the northeast corner of the Ogallala Aquifer, including part of the Sand Hills. A release, while not a good thing, simply cannot contaminate the entirety of the aquifer because of the position of the pipeline and the regional flow within the aquifer to the east and to the south. Therefore, it does not threaten the drinking water supply for two million people, nor the ability of this aquifer to support agriculture generally. With respect to spills. Much has been made of spills on the Keystone line, and there have been 14 of them. They were all at pumping stations. They didn't involve breaches of the pipe. Most of them were quite small, some were less than five gallons. All were contained. The largest, which was 500 barrels, which seems fairly large, is really just the inventory of gasoline at a larger gas station and be held in storage tanks. And by the way, all of those pump stations were built by nonunion labor. There was mention of no long plumes. There was a mention of very long plumes, 15 miles long. That simply can't happen with this oil. It makes assumptions of the material being much more like water, it's very hard to mix with water. Hydrocarbon risk in the Ogallala Aquifer is nothing new either. You accept it here every day. There's something like in the Ogallala Aquifer generally in Nebraska, there's about 17 million gallons of gasoline, kerosene, jet fuel and other hydrocarbon fuels in underground storage tanks which we know do leak. And in the Sand Hills area of Nebraska, there are roughly two million gallons of hydrocarbon fuels in underground storage tanks. The USGS in a significant study in 1997, and then continued 2002 to 2004, didn't find any significant contamination from hydrocarbons or really much else in the Ogallala Aquifer. Thank you.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker number ten.  CAP DIERKS: Good afternoon, and welcome to Holt County, Nebraska. My name is Senator -- ex- Senator Cap Dierks. I was a member of the legislature for 20 years. And during that time I don't think there was a year went by that we didn't study or discuss water issues in our Natural Resources Committee. It's just part of the business, so we aren't exactly uneducated along those lines. I think we know quite a bit about water movement and how to protect our aquifers.  CAP DIERKS: I live in the greatest nation in the world. The only known constitutional republic that survived over 200 years.  CAP DIERKS: Why did those other constitutional republics not survive? Because of greed, greed on the part of the people who want power, greed on the part of those who want money, and greed on the part of those who want land. We have by way of a Constitution, set up a system in this country called capitalism. Capitalism is what made this country great. I mean you might compare this to socialism or communism, or Naziism, capitalism is the thing that made this country great. With a certain amount of difficulty among our capitalists going the greed route, we could get in trouble. And that's one of the things I want to counsel about today. I'm also a resident of the greatest state in the nation.  CAP DIERKS: Some might argue with me about that, but I've always felt that way. I've never felt like there was any state in the nation that served the citizens better than Nebraska. We are at this point the most economically efficient state in the nation. We're number one. I wonder why that is. We have the greatest agricultural economy in the nation, and the reason we have the greatest agricultural economy in the nation is because we've got that aquifer down there. We're able to produce corn enough to feed all the cattle we feed, plus have enough left over to provide all the ethanol we need. And someone mentioned a little bit ago about some of the toxins in our water systems and our natural resources. One of the reasons that the storage tanks had difficulty is because they were storing gasoline with MTBE in it. MTBE is methyltroxilbutylic acid [sic], and it's a carcinogen. That was why Congress ordered us to find a different way of providing that part of our gas. So we're using ethanol to do that. Ethanol doesn't have the toxicity, as someone mentioned a little bit ago. Ethanol can drop through all the underground storage tanks, it won't bother a thing. I am also a graduate veterinarian from Kansas State University in 1961, and I practiced veterinary medicine here in this area for 40 years. As a matter of fact I came to -- I was from Ewing, Nebraska, but I came back because every Tuesday is inspector of the Atkinson livestock market. We have a problem in this country with safety in our food animals, and we need to -- and veterinarians are on the front line with this effort. I wanted to add one more thing before I quit, I see I got the minute sign. I'm also a rancher. I am the fourth generation in a ranch that was homesteaded by my great-grandfather in 1883. And I've been managing this ranch for 46 years. I know the value of water. We have a flowing well that goes through a creek -- flowing well that goes through our ranch, a clear water creek, and we have two of these artesian wells bubble out of the ground. The most pure water you could ask for. The temperature of that water is 56 degrees winter and summer. Ideal place to winter cows. You don't have to chop ice for them. It's a great situation. It is the cleanest, clearest water that there is. I've had it tested time and time again, it's absolutely 100 percent pure. There's not one thing in it that hurts anybody. And I don't want anything to be put in it that would hurt anybody.  CAP DIERKS: All Nebraskan citizens; all Nebraskan citizens deserve the very best, and I urge the State Department to ask that this pipeline be routed around the aquifer. Thank you.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker number 11.  JOHN BLASINGAME: Hello, and thank you for coming to listen to all of us, okay? I'm John Blasingame, a member of the Laborers International Union of North America Local 1140 in Omaha. And of course, as you can see I'm in favor of the pipeline. I don't like the idea of a pipe leaking out on our soil. I don't like the idea of another Exxon Valdez or BP blowout. I don't like the idea of millions of tons of agricultural chemicals being sprayed out on our land. I don't like the idea of our automobiles pumping tons of carbon into the atmosphere. But I'm also realistic enough to know that unless we changed our ways profoundly, which I'm sure we won't, we are wed to this society that we've created in this part of North America. We will keep on using fossil fuels. That's a given, unless we want to stop driving cars. That said, it makes much more sense to me to get petroleum from a nearby friendly neighbor than from a possibly very hostile society somewhere in the Middle East.  JOHN BLASINGAME: This pipeline will also be built with living wages, not a minimum wage. It will provide jobs all the way from the Canadian border to the Gulf of Mexico, jobs that people can live on and make a house payments with, can pay a mortgage payment, provide medical care for the whole family, and pay into a very good pension fund by my union. I've heard several times people say well, these are temporary jobs. Ladies and gentlemen, any construction job is a temporary job. You finish the pipeline and you're laid off. You finish the building, you're laid off. You finish pouring the street or highway, you're laid off. You go back to the union hall, put your name on the out-of-work list and wait for a job to come up. That's a given. And we have contractors that we have contracts with that we provide labor for. It's a situation that's gone on ever since unions have been in this country. Anyway, that said, I would propose that -- and I know that the Obama Administration is under the gun to find more jobs, and here is a prime opportunity. This will be a huge investment that will generate a lot of tax money back into our local, state and federal treasuries, and also create demands for the goods and services that our businesses provide. I urge you to build this pipeline.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker number 12.  TERI TAYLOR: Thank you to the State Department for coming to the heartland of the nation where an issue is deep in all of our hearts. My name is Teri Taylor. I am a born and raised Nebraska Sand Hills native, having lived here my entire life, and I am here to respectfully tell you that the pipeline running through this area of Nebraska is just wrong.  TERI TAYLOR: My credentials are few. I am mostly a grandmother and a rancher. And for the past three-plus years, I have been desperately fighting for the very future of both of those things, my grandchildren and the Sand Hills ranch. My husband and I, along with our son and his family, are ranchers in the Sand Hills. We consider ourselves extremely fortunate as our ranch is now the home to the sixth generation of Taylors. Unfortunately, our ranch has been targeted as the proposed site of the Keystone XL pipeline. TransCanada is seeking permanent easement from my family for 26,175 feet plus that equal amount in temporary easements, or just over five miles. The very idea of a 36-inch pipeline carrying tar sands oil and coursing it's way through our Sand Hills pastures, and through our subirrigated hay meadows is the kind of things that nightmares are made of. And I'm not being overly dramatic. Having spent a lifetime on this land, I know what the construction phase alone of this pipeline will bring to this fragile Sand Hills land. It will be devastating. If permission is granted for this pipeline, in a few short months TransCanada will succeed in destroying what it has taken my family and the generations before us over 100 years to create, a vast productive area capable of sustaining an active cattle ranch that not only provides food for my family, but provides beef to a large world market. Over the past three years, the news of this proposed pipeline has loomed over us. We have run the gamut of emotions. A fair share I am reluctant to say has been anger. Anger because a foreign company can threaten us with eminent domain if we choose not to freely turn our land over to them. Angry because we have been forced to defend our rights to our property, and angry because in a nation so hungry for oil that it would choose to ignore the dangers this pipeline presents. There has also been bouts of fear as we mentally picture the havoc that the construction of this pipeline, if approved, will create for ours and other like ours ranching operations. A sense of sadness that the gentle rolling hills on our ranch will carry a scar for eternity.  TERI TAYLOR: And sadness that the world's largest aquifer, dating back millions of years, may soon be home to a crude oil pipeline and an accident waiting to happen. I have heard the testimonies of the union workers that speak of the need for jobs, and I by no means criticize or condemn them. As a rancher, you respect and admire anyone who is willing to do an honest day's work. Make no mistake about it, there is probably not one person here that doesn't pray that the work performed on this pipeline, if it materializes, isn't of the highest quality humanly possible. After all, the entire future of my family and families across the state of Nebraska will depend on it. It has often been said that there can be good found in every situation, and I believe that. And this particular one, it is the single voices have become choirs and the word has spread across this great nation of ours, and the voices are all in harmony. The pipeline is not in the national interest.  TERI TAYLOR: Perhaps the words of one of our Founding Fathers of this great nation, Benjamin Franklin, said it best. "When the well is dry we know the worth of water." I pray it does not take the contamination of all or merely a part of the Ogallala Aquifer for us to realize the true worth of water. Please deny this permit.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker number 13, and can you speak into the mic please.  DANNY HENDRIX: Yes, ma'am. That was good, that was real good. My name is Danny Hendrix. I'm the business manager of Pipeliners Local Union 798. I represent over 6800 members nationwide. It's an organization composed of the most highly trained pipeline constructors in the world. And we built the original Keystone, and if this is permitted we'll build the Keystone XL. We believe if you're going to build it, build it right. Where skilled laborers is used, TransCanada's commitment to building the best pipeline possible is assured. Build it but build it right. Hopefully, before we leave here today, you will understand the importance of this project not only from a national security standpoint, but as a common sense approach. Local 798 members have had the privilege to partner with TransCanada for the past three years on construction of the original Keystone. That was finished on time, underbudget and with full-time compliance with all federal, state and environmental laws. Build it but build it right. You know, I heard I don't know if it was a snicker or what in the background when I think Dr. Fisher was talking about those stations that leaked. There was some leaks, not on the pipeline, they were on the stations. Those stations were not constructed by skilled union craftsmen. That's a matter of fact. We were called to come fix them after the leaked. Many of the remarks from opposition to the Keystone XL or about the pipeline is what if, what if. Local 798 as a group has been involved with many mega projects such as the REX project that was almost 1700 miles, a 36 and 42-inch came right through Ogallala Aquifer, came all the way across your state. Goes right down through the heart of it. The Alliance pipeline, that's 886 miles of 36-inch; the Vector, 348 miles of 42-inch; the Ruby line, which is just finished is 680 miles of 42-inch; and the Alaska pipeline, 800 miles of 48-inch. So we're very familiar about how to build pipeline. We're very good at it.  DANNY HENDRIX: All of these projects met with the same opposition and many of the same what- ifs. All of the mega projects involve geographical obstacles and challenges thought to be insurmountable to the naysayers. But through proper planning and advanced engineering, today they all quietly lay in the ground performing a conduit of energy for America's needs, built and built right. Pipelines are the safest and most efficient way to transport any liquid or vapor, and to that I don't believe there is an argument. When a client such as TransCanada chooses the best value contractors, who in turn use the best craftsmen in the industry, utilizing third-party inspection to insure complete compliance, that the environmental issues are properly handled and instituted so that the impact to the landowners and natural resources are minimized. You know, we talk about that minimize or minimal, okay? When you built your house there was an impact to the environment. Minimal, but there was an impact. Build it but build it right. To me personally, this is the most important thing. The guys talk about jobs, and jobs are important, they really are. Everybody needs a job. And this country needs a lot of them. Fortunately, in the pipeline industry, we've had a good economy. When everybody else is turned down, we've been doing pretty good, still doing pretty good. The most important thing for me is this. We need to quit the transfer of wealth to the OPEC countries.  DANNY HENDRIX: We're going to continue to buy fuel in this  country. We're going to buy crude, and we have a choice now to buy  more from Canada and bring it down and refine it for our use. We  are buying OPEC fuel at a million dollars a minute, a million dollars a minute. A farmer can't afford that. An environmentalist  can't afford that. A politician can't afford that. A pipeliner can't afford that. This country can't afford that. Half a trillion dollars. This gives us an alternate to buy from. Canada shares our boundaries, we share the Pacific, we share the Atlantic. We share the economy with them. We need to buy from Canada. Now the reroute, I'm not against the reroute. I'm all about that. I mean that's more miles. I mean if we keep financing OPEC and they're financing the wars, how can  we win these two wars when we're financing both sides? We can't do it. We need the Canadian crude, we do. So let's figure out a way to get that done. But build it and build it right. Thank you.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker number 14.  JOHN HANSEN: Thank you. My name is John Hansen. I'm the president of Nebraska Farmers Union. We're the second oldest general farm organization in the state proudly serving Nebraska's farm and ranch families since 1913. And I would say to Mr. McCollister you didn't mention us when you talked about the opposition. But you know what, we were here a long time before you showed up, and we're going to be here a long time after the millionaire who funds your special interest group stops funding. We do represent the public interest and we represent it through sound public policy both at the state and the federal level. If we are to look at this issue clearly, we must have an honest conversation. And part of that conversation is stop the business of pretending that this oil is somehow destinied [sic] for U.S. use. This pipeline --  JOHN HANSEN: This pipeline is about going from Northern Alberta to the east to international seaports with refining capacity in the east coast of Texas, instead of the west coast of Canada for a reason, because that is the easiest way for the owners of the oil to get their oil home. Now whose home? Who are we talking about? Who owns the tar sands? Well, here's a list of the home countries of the folks who own it. I'm Norwegian and I have to tell you Norway's one of them. We look at the laundry list here of England, France, Canada, China, Korea, China again, Korea, Thailand. If you can believe the folks from TransCanada when they were talked to at the state fair, they said Russia and China were the two big folks who were driving this because they wanted to get their oil home. There are no existing conditions that this oil will ever be used in the U.S. If there was, we'd be building a pipeline to Cushing, Oklahoma, or McPherson, Kansas, where we've put real jobs and energy here in the U.S.  JOHN HANSEN: If you want to talk about real jobs, let's build jobs for the future. Let's build jobs about ethanol and cellulosic ethanol and biodiesel and wind, and those things that actually come from the U.S. or going to be built in the U.S., and lets the U.S. benefit from it. Thirty-seven years ago when I was first elected to public office as a natural resource district director, this part of the country made national news. And what was the news? We had two things, two variables that are in direct play here today. The leaching of foreign contaminants into our groundwater and our water supply, and soil erosion because our thinly-vegetated Sand Hills had been disturbed and they were blowing away closing county roads, creating a huge environmental catastrophe. Local folks, natural resource districts and others stepped up to the plate, did what we needed to do, made the necessary corrections to protect our very fragile Sand Hills and our invaluable Ogallala Aquifer. These Sand Hills are a national treasure and the water in this ground is worth more than all the oil in the world.  JOHN HANSEN: We've got a problem, and the problem is that we have a vacuum relative to the regulation of oil pipelines. We don't have the clear hand of the federal government and we don't have, unfortunately, the State of Nebraska stepping up and assuming those authorities that those of us who have done their homework know that we good and well have. As a result we have created a vacuum that puts our natural resources at risk, and for me as I represent landowners, I urge you to listen to the stories of landowners because it goes to the very heart of the commitments of TransCanada relative to all the things they're fixing to do for us and to us. Because when push comes to shove, the treatment that they have had of our landowners is atrocious and indefensible. Thank you.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Speaker number 15.  BILL McALLISTER: Excuse me for one minute. I want to announce that the overflow room is open, and there's a live video feed with sound if you're interested in going to our lecture room. It is air-conditioned.  RON KAMINSKI: Good afternoon. My name is Ron Kaminski. I'm the business manager of Laborers Local 1140 here based in Nebraska. I'm also here today as an executive board member of the Omaha Federation of Labor. And on behalf of the 700 members of our local union, on behalf of the over 500,000 member of Laborers International Union in North America, the 30,000 members of the Omaha Federation of Labor and over 50,000 members of the Nebraska AFL-CIO, I would like to express our support for the construction of the Keystone XL pipeline. Since 2006, our local union has trained hundreds of residents of Nebraska for pipeline work in the state. We constructed the Rockies Express natural gas pipeline that runs through the aquifer. We constructed also just recently the Keystone pipeline, which is now operational. I've heard a lot of talk today, and I heard a lot of talk on Tuesday about moving the route of the proposed Keystone XL pipeline down the corridor that the Keystone pipeline runs right now. A lot of folks don't understand that the Keystone line also runs through the aquifer in our state. We believe deeply in the jobs that this will create. We believe deeply in the relationship with TransCanada that we've had for years. Unfortunately, not everybody in this room has got to work with TransCanada, but I'm a little appalled by the negative talk left and right about TransCanada. With that relationship that we created, TransCanada invested in the residents of our state. As a result of that relationship, with the work we did on the Keystone pipeline, we were able to open up a new training facility located in Omaha, Nebraska. At that training facility, not only do we train pipeline workers, we train workers to build ethanol plants in this state. We train workers to build biodiesel plants in this state. We also just kicked off our new weatherization training, which trains folks to weatherize homes in the state of Nebraska, to reduce the amount of energy we use. We care deeply about our environment. When we worked on the original Keystone pipeline project, the process was very straightforward. We understood what needed to be done. We did it on time. We did it within budget. The line of communication between our union and TransCanada was open, and we accomplished that construction of that pipeline without any major issues. That is a hundred percent correct what you hear today. You people may not believe it or not, but where those leaks occurred with the Keystone pipeline, those projects were built in those pump stations by nonunion labor. In the last few months you've heard numbers that have been thrown around by some other groups. Let's be honest about it. These other groups, a lot of these environmental groups are completely opposed to the use of fossil fuels. We are going to continue to use fossil fuels in this country, and we're going to continue to use them on a daily basis. Why would we continue to buy oil from Middle East countries that do not like us one bit, countries that we send our children over to fight wars over oil, when we can get that further oil from the country of Canada? In closing today, I would like to say I appreciate the State Department being here in Atkinson. I'm a lifelong resident of the state of Nebraska. I'm a huge Nebraska Cornhusker fan and look forward to the Ohio State game here coming up after all this is over. But the bottom line is we need to get oil from an ally. We need to build this pipeline to create the jobs. Moving the proposed route is just a stall tactic in our eyes because the original Keystone line where a lot of people say like this move, also runs through the aquifer. I urge the State Department to approve the Keystone XL pipeline permit so we can get Nebraskans back to work. Thank you.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker number 16.  JOHN STANSBURY: Good afternoon. Thank you for providing this forum. My name is John Stansbury. I'm professor of environmental engineering and water resource engineering at the University of Nebraska. Whether the pipeline should be built or not is actually a very complex question. It requires analysis of economic, social, political and environmental concerns. Since I'm an environmental engineer, I'm only going to address the last one, the environmental concerns. Whether the pipeline should be built or not is a question that still needs to be debated. But one thing that's absolutely certain is that the permit as it now stands should not be allowed.  JOHN STANSBURY: The reason for that is the Department of State has not satisfied the requirements of the NEPA law. In NEPA, as everybody knows, it requires an environmental impact statement. Assumption of the environmental impact statement is that it will be thorough, unbiased and independent. None of those criteria have been satisfied in the current environmental impact statement. It is not thorough; it is not unbiased, and it is not independent. Essentially all of the substantive findings in the EIS are taken directly from TransCanada's document or documents of TransCanada's consultants. And I'm going to give you some examples of some of those so that you don't take my word for it, this is right out of the document. One of the things you have to do in the EIS, to evaluate the potential impacts from spills, is to evaluate the potential frequency of spills from the pipeline. TransCanada -- and the documentation of that process is directly from TransCanada's documents. And the Department of State has chosen simply to publish exactly what TransCanada wrote down in their documents. The first thing they did look at, historical spill frequency from the historical database. That's a great idea. Then they looked at the categories of spills, that's also a great idea. But one of the categories was spills with no identified cause, so they simply decided to ignore all of those spills in their assessment. That was 23 percent of all historical spills simply ignored in the EIS. And the Department of State chose to use that data set. So that is clearly not unbiased, and it's clearly not independent. Their calculations, which Department of State chose to accept, resulted in 11 spills over the 50-year design life of the pipeline. If you use the actual data, you get more like 91 spills. That's a difference of eight times. So what we're being asked to believe is that TransCanada's pipeline, although I completely believe that the pipefitters all do a good job, we're being asked to believe that the new pipeline will be eight times better than all the rest of the pipelines in the world. A little tough to swallow, but the Department of State has decided to go ahead and accept that data. I see I'm going long, I have to hurry up here. Another thing you have to do is figure out the worst case spill volume. One of the things TransCanada did in their calculations was to use 11.5 minutes as the shutdown time for the pipeline in their worst case spill scenario. Well, 11.5 minutes might be the best case spill scenario, but it's certainly not the worst case spill scenario. And Department of State again has chosen to use their 11.5 minutes in their environmental impact statement. That is clearly not unbiased and it's clearly not independent. In fact, the recent spills from pipelines are the shutdown times have been one hour at the Yellowstone River, somewhere between two and 12 hours at the Kalamazoo River. I think the worst case scenario should be at least as long as the actual shutdown times that we have data for. And the result of that is it drastically reduces the predicted volume of oil that will be spilled. Once again, not unbiased and certainly not independent. TransCanada, when they calculated some potential impacts to spills in a river, calculated that the concentration of benzene in the river would be 2.2 milligrams per liter. That's 440 times the drinking water standard. After they calculated that it's going to be 440 times drinking water standard, they did no further analysis. They didn't calculate how far downstream it would go. They didn't calculate how long it would last. They didn't calculate how many people would be exposed. They didn't calculate how many additional cancers there might be. They essentially didn't do the risk assessment. And that was in the risk assessment section of the EIS. So I don't know how you can consider that this thing is thorough or complete or adequate if the purpose of the section is not even completed. So certainly not a thorough assessment. And lastly, if they calculate if there's a leak above an aquifer, that the leak would be small and the plume would be localized. And the people have pointed out that depends on your definition. The inspections will only be every two weeks, so in that two-week period, with a small spill, that will be less than the detection capabilities of the detection system, you could release somewhere around 60,000 gallons of benzene to the aquifer. And that will form a very large plume, unlike what someone said earlier. Thank you very much. I guess my bottom line is there has not been an independent, thorough, adequate environmental impact statement done, so this permit shouldn't even be considered until that is completed.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker number 17.  JERI KUCHERA: Thank you for holding this meeting in Atkinson today, and thank you for the opportunity to comment. My name is Jeri Kuchera. I'm a lifelong resident of Rock County, a farm wife, a mother and a grandmother of six. Approximately one month ago, my 97-year- old mother passed away. She was an affected landowner on the route of the proposed Keystone pipeline. Her land has been in our family for over 110 years, and she was adamantly opposed to this pipeline, as am I. Not only is this a political issue, it is a very personal issue to me. I do not believe that granting the Presidential Permit for the proposed route is in the national interest or in the interest of the state of Nebraska. I find it very difficult to understand how routing a 36-inch pipeline through the unique and fragile environment and very shallow water table of the Sand Hills can result in little or no environmental impact. There are many farmers and ranchers here today who have seen the impact of disturbing the ecologically sensitive area. The impacts of farming and ranching practices from previous generations are evident to this date in many areas in spite of years of reclamation. The FEIS states that there are 65 miles of the pipeline where it is less than ten feet from the aquifer. It does not say how many miles there are where it is actually in the aquifer. Once again, the farmers and ranchers here are knowledgeable about the fluctuating water table in this area. There are many areas where the seasonal water table is above the surface of the ground. This is the Ogallala Aquifer. The decision you are making should not be based on the promise of some short-term jobs and economic activity. TransCanada has put an exaggerated and positive spin on everything associated with the pipeline, including spills. In Section 3.13.6.7 of the FEIS regarding the socioeconomics of oil spills, it states quote: "In some cases, response to oil spills could generate positive local economic activity for the limited duration of the spill response activities as a result of the need for lodging, meals, equipment and other facilities, materials and logistic support for the cleanup crews and the incident command team," end quote. We do not need and nor should we assume the risk for so-called positive local economic activity.  JERI KUCHERA: The questionable tactics used by the land agents employed by TransCanada to gain easements does not give me any sense of trust in this company. The intimidation, threats of condemnation and blatant lies told to landowners by agents undoubtedly resulted in many easements. Is this a trustworthy method of doing business? The decision you make will not be for the short term, but will affect the future generations of the Sand Hills and the state of Nebraska. The risk to our water, our land, or livelihoods and the futures of our children and grandchildren is not acceptable. Please deny this permit.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker number 18.  DAVID BARNETT: Good afternoon. My name is David Barnett and I'm here to speak on behalf of the 6800 members of Pipeliners Local Union 798, and the 340,000 members of the United Association. I want to thank you for allowing me to speak at this hearing today. As you know, our nation is facing many problems, and I believe that's something we can all agree on. The two biggest challenges we face are high unemployment and national security. These are issues I think no one is disputing, but how we handle these problems is usually where the conflict comes in. And the TransCanada Keystone XL pipeline is now at the center of such conflict. I feel it is because of misconceptions and concerns about how this project will affect the environment. The Keystone pipeline will certainly have benefits for the national economy, especially considering that every time there is a rise in gas prices, we hear about how this affects every individual and every business, small and large. And not just in terms of what consumers pay at the pump. There is also increased manufacturing and transportation costs on virtually every product and service that we enjoy. This project will have great benefits to the states and local communities along this route by pumping 600 million dollars in new tax revenues into their economies. It's a win-win situation that is an estimated result in 6.5 billion dollar increase in personal income, and 5.3 billion dollars in personal property taxes over the life of the pipeline. With all of the heated debates now taking place on the subject of taxes, it is also important to note that this project will cost the American taxpayers nothing. Instead of a bailout, this is a totally private investment. Finally, on the issue of national security. Please consider the source of this oil. It is coming from one of our closest allies and largest trading partners. We already import more oil from Canada than from any other country, and this additional supply could help us reduce our dependence on oil from the Middle East nations that do offer the stability and friendship of our Canadian neighbors to the north. We also ask you to remember that if we don't secure and refine this oil, then China will. China will then sell it back to us at a higher cost. Our relationship with China already includes a huge debt owed by the United States, and a growing trade imbalance in China's favor. Now if you'll allow me to shift gears. Our members constructed the original Keystone pipeline, including some but not all of the pump stations. The stations did not -- that we did not construct were awarded in the open bidding process to contractors with less trained and lesser-skilled workforce. It is within these few stations that we did not construct, that all of these 12 leaks that you have heard mentioned here today occurred. They all occurred above ground and in these stations. I'm here to tell you absolutely that none of these leaks occurred in the below-ground pipeline that was constructed totally by Local Union 798 members. It is my feeling that this was a hard lesson learned for TransCanada. I say that because when it was time for the emergency repairs to be made to these stations, TransCanada called upon our union contractors and our Local 798 members to make repairs, and rebuild it right. I would also like to point out that if the Keystone XL pipeline is constructed, TransCanada has made a commitment to use our union contractors and our union skilled labor to construct the entire pipeline and pump stations in your state, and build it right. This project will create an estimated 13,000 construction jobs, which is approximately 15 percent of these jobs going to my brothers and sister members. I have heard time and again that these construction jobs are only temporary jobs and aren't worthwhile jobs. Our members constructed the REX pipeline in 2008, and the path of this pipeline was west to east across Nebraska. I mention this for two reasons. One, it, too, crossed the Ogallala Aquifer to accompany approximately 20,000 additional miles of pipelines that already exist and are safely transporting products across it every day. And two, this job created the opportunity for many of your fellow Nebraskans to become gainfully employed, and also by their choosing became members of our local union. The question of whether or not Keystone TransCanada pipeline moves forward is really a question of whether or not America moves forward. It should not be a political issue, nor should it be decided based on political ideology. This should be about what is best for our nation. So it's time to put all of those issues aside and focus on the facts. When you examine the facts, you will find that the TransCanada Keystone XL pipeline is good for the American economy and good for the American people. On behalf of my 6800 pipeline members and the 340,000 members of the United Association, I humbly ask that the State Department approve the Keystone XL pipeline project, and let's get the paychecks flowing. Thank you.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker number 19.  TIM TAYLOR: I'm Dr. Tim Taylor, veterinarian and rancher from Newport, and the pipeline route crosses my family's ranch. The Sand Hills of Nebraska are an ecological treasure for the state and the nation. I do not believe that the Keystone XL pipeline constructed in the Sand Hills is in our national interest. Over 700 species of plants grow here, over 90 percent of those are native. Large tracts of our ranch are populated with the same species of prairie grass that stabilized windblown sand dunes thousands of years ago. This is not a result of passive conservation, but rather active stewardship by my family for over 100 years of cattle ranching. The landscape bears scars of long abandoned wagon roads that traverse the northwest, the southeasterly direction of prevailing winds, and resulted in massive blowouts. Winds whipped the sand with such fury that it takes decades to bring partial reclamation to these areas. Some have been fenced out for over a generation to prevent their reawakening. The abundant supply of clean groundwater converts an area that would otherwise be inhospitable to most agriculture, into a paradise for cattle, crops and kids. These two elements, the sand and the water, are in a constant dynamic relationship with each other. Rarely do we have Goldilocks conditions where things are just right, and nature allows us to make a mistake. Only experience of generations and active stewardship have allowed us to thrive. I'm proud that today more than ever before, our business is in balance with our local ecology. The future is bright for our Sand Hills ranch. However, a dark cloud is on the horizon. Good intentions but poor planning has left over five miles of our ranch threatened by the Keystone XL route. What has been developed over thousands of years of natural conditions, and enhanced by 100 years of responsible stewardship can be erased by one bad decision. If TransCanada is allowed to peel back the fragile covering of these long-sleeping dunes and penetrate the aquifer and our wet meadows, nature will react in ways not anticipated by TransCanada or the State Department's own EIS. The winds have been unusually calm here for the past week. In the night they came alive with the fury, and this morning the sand was moving again on the hills, and once again the winds resume their work of bringing the Ogallala Aquifer's bounty to the surface. Heed this warning. Protect the Sand Hills, keep our country strong by routing this pipeline to the more stable soils of the east and away from this land of sand and water.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker number 20.  RON BECKMAN: Hello there, I'm Ron Beckman. I'm from Plattsmouth, Nebraska, and member of the Local 1140. And we've been low on work for several years, and I know for a fact, and you people know that the minute the pipeline does get into place, your grandkids, your kids are going to be out there trying to get a job, and I'm for that. But let's take and quit arguing, and get the pipeline signed over and done with. Thank you very much.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker number 21.  JAMES OSBORNE: Thank you for letting me share. My name is James Osborne. I'm from Brown County, Ainsworth, Nebraska. Can you hear me? Okay. I'm also a member of Local 554. I worked the first Keystone pipeline. In fact, I was the teamster's union steward when we came into Nebraska. I saw how this went together, and the 798 guys are absolutely as good as gold. I don't think anybody could build a better pipeline than 798.  JAMES OSBORNE: I don't have any problem with the union labor. In fact, I made $27 an hour and almost $14 an hour in benefits, and got paid between 60 and 80 hours a week. I made a lot of money. I just came back from the Ruby pipeline, I made a lot of money out there. But you know what, I can't sell out the Ogallala Aquifer. I can't do it.  JAMES OSBORNE: There's no reason for this pipeline to come down through the aquifer. Now I was fortunate enough to get to move around in different positions on the first Keystone pipeline. In fact, I got to bore underneath the river, which was a new experience for me. When they put this pipeline together, 4,000 foot of this pipeline in Nebraska, we hauled water from South Dakota to Nebraska because Nebraska did not want them to set a precedence of filling that pipeline with our water. Then when we emptied the water we hauled it back to South Dakota to dump it, because they did not want Nebraska water in that pipeline. Because this pipeline, the first Keystone pipeline, was designed as a water line, but nobody in North Dakota, South Dakota or Nebraska, would let them transport water through our state. So then they came back with this tar sands pipeline. This is a guise, that's what I believe. If you look at the Enbridge pipeline that went all the way to the Great Lakes, and has spilled oil in every one of the Great Lakes, and now they're cleaning that up. And under the guise of cleanup, they're actually shipping oily water down the pipeline, which is what they wanted in the first place. Now there's going to be spills in this pipeline, okay? It's going to happen. I'm glad to hear that they're going to manufacture it in the United States, if they manufacture it, or if they build it; I hope that's true. The first one was all Indonesia and China pipe, a hundred percent of it was. And I don't think it was up to quality. Now they want to use thinner pipe and higher pressure. That's not a good thing. They want to actually take a bigger risk. If anything, I think if they force their way through here and the State Department was to make this thing come through here, then let's create some real jobs. Let's put a 72- inch pipeline around that 36-inch pipeline, and we'll ship water in the big one and they can ship oil in the little one.  JAMES OSBORNE: And we'll know that there's a spill long before it gets into the environment because it'll be in our water in between the two pipelines. That would be pipeline safety. Now the first thing we should do is keep it off the aquifer. It's going to create more jobs; it's going to be a longer term thing. And if they're truly worried about this, they had all of these on the same drawing -- they already had them in the works when they built the first one. If you look at the map, they could have put all three of them in at the same time if they truly wanted to save money. But they didn't. This is about water. This is about getting into this Ogallala Aquifer. Now you guys at the State Department, and they're already talking about abandoned pipelines being able to transfer water from region to region. So who's to say that they're not going to get these pipelines in through the aquifer and into these water areas. Then they're going to say you know what, the tar sands oil was a bad idea, we're sorry. But the federal government says that we can transfer water from region to region with our abandoned pipelines.  JAMES OSBORNE: If we want to transfer water, I think the State of Nebraska ought to build a Sand Hills Water District and we ought to transfer water all over the country. We ought to sell them all that floodwater that's caused so many problems. It ought to be in a pipeline, and it should be sold. And then we'll create some union jobs; we'll create Nebraska jobs; we'll create jobs for everybody. And that would be an awesome thing I believe. Now one other thing that I just want to make a point is, we have the choice to have that water line. It may never happen. I may not be the friendliest alcohol or ethanol proponent, but we have the choice because we have clean water. Now I can argue with these farmers all day long, but at least they have the choice to grow corn now. If we spoil this water and get this stuff in the water, we're not going to have those choices.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker number 22.  MICHAEL WHATLEY: Good evening. I'm Michael Whatley and I'm the Executive Vice President of Consumer Energy Alliance. CEA is made up of more than 250,000 individuals and over 165 affiliate organizations that represent every sector of the U.S. economy, including truckers, highway users, shippers, airlines, manufacturers, iron and steel producers, farmers, chemical manufacturers and energy producers. CEA strongly supports the Keystone XL pipeline because of the economic benefits it will provide, not only to Nebraska but for the nation as a whole. The pipeline will create more than 7500 jobs in Nebraska, and over 120,000 jobs total across the United States. Even more, this project will generate over 150 million dollars in state and local taxes for Nebraska, and generate more than 20 billion dollars of economic growth nationwide. That's a lot of money that can go to improving public schools, roads and hospitals. The Keystone XL pipeline project will also strengthen our national energy security. Canada is our neighbor, our ally and our largest trading partner. The 700,000 barrels of oil per day that this pipeline will bring to the Gulf Coast refineries will be coming from places like Oklahoma, Montana, the Dakotas and Canada. It is not subject to violent revolutions like we've seen this year in Egypt and Libya. It cannot be used as a political tool like Russian and OPEC oil can. It is highly discounted from the prices we pay for oil from the Persian Gulf, and will help drive down fuel prices for both our military and American drivers. Not only will the pipeline bring great economic and energy security benefits to Nebraska and the United States, it will do so without harming our water or our environment. The State Department's extensive environmental review of the pipeline concluded there is no scenario in which the Northern High Plains Aquifer would be adversely affected. The State Department also studied over a dozen other routes for the pipeline, and found that the current route is the safest alternative, and that the other routes examined would, quote, "disturb more land and cross more bodies of water than the proposed route." Over 25,000 miles of product pipeline already cross the Ogallala. Keystone XL will be built with state-of-the-art technology, and pipelines are the safest most efficient way to transport oil. It is clear that it is in the national interest to allow construction of this important pipeline. Because it will be environmentally safe, will create thousands of high paying jobs; we will significantly boost the U.S. economy; it will enhance our energy security, CEA requests on behalf of energy consumers nationwide, the Administration grant the Presidential Permit and allow the construction of the Keystone XL pipeline. Thank you.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Before I call on number 23, I just want to make a few announcements. First is Bill McAllister said earlier there is an overflow room with air-conditioning, where you can watch the public meeting. I also would like to convey that we're going to have to take five- minute break for our reporter. And I'd like to do that after the 23rd speaker. I'd also like to point out that we have a total of 156 of you signed in to speak, and we want to get to all of you. But in order for us to do that, I would greatly appreciate it if you could make your remarks succinct. If you could make your remarks within three minutes. And what we'd like to do is display a card when you have one minute to speak, then you'll see a card that says thank you. That's one thing that you can do. You can also, to the extent that someone has said or made remarks that you agree with, you can certainly state your name and you can just say you agree with that individual. You can also of course, submit your comments in writing. And one thing I would ask of you, and I know that this is going to be extremely difficult, but if you can hold your applause. Because when you are applauding that takes time away from other speakers. So again if you can consider that I'd appreciate it. Speaker number 23.  MAGGIE CONRAD: Thank you, ma'am. Contain yourself, Big Red. Hi, my name is Maggie Conrad. I'm 27, grew up in Ericson, Nebraska; graduated from high school, joined the United States Navy, fought for freedom for four years; came home, married my high school sweetheart, moved to Burwell, and currently have the hardest yet most rewarding job in the world. I'm a stay-at-home mom. To my main bang. Picture in your head your children, grandchildren, maybe it's your neighbor's kids, everyone in here that has a child that is near and dear to them. Just for a moment picture their cheesy little grin. Well, I have three reasons I do not agree with this route. Gracie, who is five; Chet, four; and Natalie, 18 months. My children. They're why I'm here today. My children and the kids in your life are the future of America, and I don't think it would be morally right -- yes, I'm from the Sand Hills and we still believe in that -- it would be morally wrong to give them a horrible start, setting them up for failure. You have heard and are going to hear a lot more educational facts and numbers from the folks on my side. I'm not going to preach those numbers to you. It's not if, it's when it will ruin our home. You folks probably ain't never been in this part of the country, and to be real honest, I'm sure that Secretary Clinton doesn't give a plug nickel about my home. But out here money doesn't mean as much as you may think. We have just enough to take care of our family and that's all we need, because family is second to the Lord, and a hell of a lot higher than wealth. Our family fund doesn't include Hawaii, Martha's Vineyard or even Florida. It's running in the sprinkler, swimming in the beloved Cedar River and pulling a bluegill out of the Calamus. That is perfectly okay with us. Our world doesn't revolve around stocks, it revolves around what is wrong and what is right. And we don't have a two-story building where I'm from. We have neighbors that wait and truly care when they ask you how's your day. That's why we love it. Now that I have brought you down to a level of every young family, citizen and landowner around here, think again of the kiddos in your mind. Let's answer that million dollar yet so simply stupid question, is the Keystone pipeline in the best interest for us. Let me answer with a question. Could you look at your child in the eye and say sorry, Gracie, I sold your future, your livelihood and your kids' kids to some overrated two-bit oil company? Hell no, that's my answer. My kids are my life just as yours are to each of you. Put your family before big money. If nothing else, think of my family, because I have been to war ready to die for yours and your family's freedom. It's your turn. God bless America and God bless your family.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. If we can have a five-minute break and we will resume after the five minutes, with speaker number 24.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Speaker 24, can you come to the microphone, speaker number 24. Is speaker number 24 here? May I call on Mitchell Parker with the Tribal Council. Speaker number 25.  CONNIE WEICHMAN: My name is Connie Weichman. I'm not associated with any party --  
MS. HOBGOOD: We can't hear you. If you can speak into the mic. And also, I just want to reiterate we're going to go to three minutes so that we can have as many of you speaking as possible. We appreciate if your remarks can be as succinct as possible. Thank you.  CONNIE WEICHMAN: My name is Connie Weichman. I'm not associated with any party or group. I came here today to represent my family. Along with my husband and son, we ranch southwest of Stuart. We have been lifelong residents of Holt County. The proposed pipeline will cross our property. President Obama says we should get our oil from a friendly source, Canada, our friendly neighbor. What kind of friend badgers and bullies you? What kind of friend says he has the right of eminent domain to take your land, land that we have worked hard to say is ours. We are good stewards of the land. We as Nebraskans are proud of our clean, fresh water, the Ogallala Aquifer. It's been said that the decision of this project should be based on science, not emotion. How can you not be emotional over something as universal as our water, especially when there's potential to have it poisoned? I can't believe that any study can say that this project will have no impact on our environment. Some of these farms and ranches have been in families over 100 years. We know what it takes to reclaim it. We've been working the same land generation after generation. And how long did it take you to do a study, a few short months? Engineers are only human and humans make errors. A project this enormous cannot be built without some errors. As for the jobs and economic boost for our state and communities, it will be short term, but the stress of living with a pipeline running through our land will be forever.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker number 26. Speaker number 26.  MITCHELL PARKER: Good evening. My name is Mitch Parker. I'm an elected  official from the Omaha Tribe of Nebraska, and we are located right in  Northeast Nebraska along the Missouri River. And today I'm honored   to be here on behalf of the Omaha Tribe of Nebraska, and that this is a historical event for us. We have never, ever been contacted to participate in these projects. And being the first Nebraskans, I'm proud of that. My people have resided in this area since the early 1600s and this truly is historical for us. I thank you all for your input here. Native citizens of Nebraska deserve to be heard on this pipeline issue. This is the first time that we have been afforded the opportunity to participate in the process. And we appreciate the opportunity to voice our feelings about this important issue. For the Omaha Tribe this is a significant issue and we have an opportunity to help each other to cooperate in the process, and to provide support and guidance to TransCanada as they cross our native lands and waters. The Tribal Historical Preservation Office has worked with TransCanada cooperatively. Perhaps the first time that this has happened on a major project. TransCanada respects the native culture and has involved our Tribal Historical Preservation Office in all of its activities on our native lands to show the proper respect to our cultural and historical sites. We appreciate that. As the Native Americans are the first environmentalists, we appreciate the cooperation we have  received from TransCanada to engage in consultation with us to give us a voice in the process. And today here, on behalf of the Omaha Tribe of Nebraska, I'm grateful that I can voice on behalf of our people the Omaha Tribe of Nebraska, we are one of four tribes that are in the state of Nebraska. And I heard a gentleman say he's proud to be living in one of the greatest states in the Union. We are in support of that. And we're quite proud to be Nebraskans here. My father, my late father used to say we're the first Nebraskan, don't forget that. So I repeat his words, you know. And thank you very much.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker number 27.  ANN WEICHMAN: Hello, welcome to North Central Nebraska. My name is Ann Weichman. I grew up in Stuart, about ten miles from here, and I now live in Ainsworth. I'm speaking on behalf of my family, the past and future generations.  
MS. HOBGOOD: If you can speak into the mic so that everyone can hear you.  ANN WEICHMAN: In the last three major oil catastrophes in Michigan, Montana and the Gulf, one thing has been evident. A thorough check or an additional step, or an additive fence would have prevented major and catastrophic losses of time, money and life. We are at that point in Nebraska. The time in which a decision can be made to prevent a catastrophe. I urge you to make that decision to prevent the damages and losses that can be prevented, and deny the TransCanadian company the permit to cross our Sand Hills. This is a defining moment in Nebraska. Will we look back at this moment and say this is when we should have made a stand? Let us have no regrets. Please deny the pipeline permit. Thank you.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. And again if you can hold your applause I'd really appreciate it. Speaker number 28.  KASTER DAVIS: Hello everyone, my name is Kaster Davis. I'm a heavy equipment operator from Union Hall 571. I've been through a few of these meetings and here now, and I've been hearing the same thing over and over again; no, yes, no, yes. It's time to make a decision. I support the pipeline and Americans go back to work. Thank you very much.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker number 29.  PAUL CORKLE: My name is Paul Corkle. I'm a Holt County resident my entire life. I represent the City of Atkinson. I'm also one of the city councilmen. I'm also a farmer/rancher. I own land not adjacent -- not right on the pipeline, but I own it just a couple miles from the pumping station, and the power line that will operate the pumping station does cross through a mile of my property. I am opposing the pipeline. I think that on our property the water table is far too shallow. We have difficulty repairing the fences during the springtime and during the winter because of adverse condition. I don't know how you're going to repair this pipeline when it's under water. Lastly I'd address the City's issue. The City of Atkinson two years ago was notified by the State Department State of Nebraska that we could no longer meet the requirements of our sewer plant. It was obsolete and we needed to replace it. So the City hired an engineering firm. We also had a gentleman like number 16, he was from the EPA, the BETU, the USDA, Army Corps of Engineers. We had a geological survey. We did borings. We did soil compaction tests for a 32-acre lagoon system. Ultimately, we even had discussion of putting in state-of-the-art polyurethane liner and raising the thing two and a half feet out of the ground as opposed to being ground level. We were going to haul the dirt in, raise it up two and a half feet. When the dust all cleared, bottom line is that they said you're too close to the water table and your sand soil will not contain the effluence. Bottom line is why can we not build a sewer plant and yet you think this TransCanada project, which is seven feet in the ground, and encompasses 65 miles of our Ogallala Aquifer, why would that not be a bigger danger than our 32 acres waste lagoon system? I don't understand.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker number 30.  RICHARD SCHMIDT: Thank you, representatives of the Department of State, and thank you for the citizens of Atkinson and surrounding communities. My name is Richie Schmidt and I work for Great Plains Laborers District Council. We represent 10,000 construction craft laborers throughout the states of Illinois, Iowa, South Dakota and the great state of Nebraska. There's probably not much that I can say tonight that probably hasn't already been said. I agree, obviously, with everybody whose number ended with an even number. But one thing that I would like to say, that I don't think I've -- people really touched on, and I think really applies to this upcoming pipeline. In my work in the area that I cover, there's 1,055 miles between the two furthest points. I spend a lot of time traveling areas, all rural communities, or at least for the most part rural communities and representing our members and our business partners. One thing I do see when I go to these rural communities is this day and age which we live in, more and more people; our sons, our daughters, our family members, are moving out of the small towns and into the bigger cities. Things just aren't what they were 40 or 50 years ago. I think rural communities -- I'm from Iowa and I see it there, and the work I do in Nebraska, small towns are dying. And it's sad to see because this is really where America was built, and this is the engine that drives our country. So when I talk about that, I want to talk about the economic impact of this pipeline and the effect that it'll have as it travels through Nebraska. It's going to give us an opportunity for our small businesses in places like Atkinson, O'Neill, all the way down to Lincoln and Oklahoma. And the 1700 miles or whatever the pipeline's going to travel, I think that there's one thing that can't be denied. There's going to be workers here. Obviously they're going to come in from out of state because that's just the nature of construction. And when those people are here there's going to be an infusion of money that comes into our local businesses unlike anything that probably towns like this have ever seen before. It will also give an opportunity for Nebraskans to build this pipeline. People that live in these communities are going to make sure that this pipeline gets built right. They're going to make sure that they're in the best interest of the construction of this pipeline. So as this pipeline passes through the aquifer, obviously we've heard both sides of the argument and how important it is. Our families, too, are involved and want the best air, the best water and the better standard of living in our communities. The best way to insure that's going to happen is that people in these communities, make sure they build the pipeline. So I humbly ask the State Department to pass this Presidential Permit and build this pipeline as proposed. Thank you.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker number 31.  GERALDINE DE GROFF: I'm Geraldine DeGroff. We're sixth generation on the ranches. We have our children here and we ranch in Rock and Holt county. There are 174,000 square miles in this Ogallala Aquifer underlying eight states. It's our nation's best interest to protect our food supply in the central part of the United States. We wish the XL pipeline to go around an area where it does not jeopardize our nation's supply of water and food. It's not in our country's best interest to allow the pipeline to pass over our Ogallala Aquifer. Many people that are here today have lived all their lives in this area in the Sand Hills of Nebraska. We know our land. We know how porous it is, and how fragile it is. We know when the water table rises and falls before and after the irrigation system. The most valuable possession that we have is our water. We require it to live and sustain not only ourselves, but also our animals and our precious wildlife that we cherish. This is what the vast majority of the people in the Sand Hills here want today, is to save our water. The is God's country. Yes, we have many college graduates that are living on the farms and ranches today. They can make a living by going to the cities and work. Even the state government right at this time is trying to promote and encourage our young people to stay in the country because they realize that a large portion of our people living in the country are in their sunshine years, and soon will be retiring and passing on to the next world. And they're worried about who's going to provide the food necessary to support the population. We cannot continue our life as we know it if our water is damaged. Eight million people drink the water out of the Ogallala Aquifer. They claim that our ethanol plants are using a million gallons a day. There are two and a half million cattle in Cherry County that depend on it for life. Most American people don't realize how essential and crucial agriculture is to our lives and our economy. We are used to having our grocery store shelves filled and our kitchens filled. But look and read and see how some of our neighboring foreign countries are living. People need to comprehend that it is because of the farmers and ranchers that the food is in the stores, after they have worked many untold hours in adverse weather conditions to provide it for everyone. In closing, not everybody ranches or farms, but everyone needs water and food. I would thank you. Thank you for your help.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker number 32.  BILL GERHARDT: Hello, I'm Bill Gerhardt. I with Laborers International  North America. I came up to say a couple of things and I might ramble  on about some other things. But I've been around and on pipelines most  of my working career. They're one of the safest ways to move products, move fluids, move gas, move liquids. There's pipelines under Nebraska, under Iowa, under Kansas now, thousands of miles. And I can't remember the last time I heard of a pipeline rupture or a pipeline leak, or pipeline anything. The other thing is that these provide good jobs, like the gentleman prior to the lady before me. In rural Iowa jobs are hard to come by, and this is going to stimulate the economy. And national security, who wouldn't rather buy petroleum from a friend than to send it overseas to the Middle East. Those are the two things I was going to talk about, but I'm going to expand here a little bit. It appears we have a lot of farmers and ranchers here, and I see a lot of red too, and I assume that's not the Wisconsin Badger people. I just want to say I grew up in a small rural town, a lot smaller than where I'm at now. I remember the coffee shops and the barber shops. I remember Saturday nights when the farmers brought their cream and eggs to town. I know what it's like to live in a rural town. I know how hard it is to eke out a living. But I just want to tell the farmers and ranchers here something maybe the environmentalists aren't telling you, is that the biggest ecological  disaster in the Gulf of Mexico wasn't the BP spill. It was that dead zone created by the herbicides and pesticides and fertilizers that come down from the Missouri, from the Platte, from the Niobrara, from the Nishnabotna into the Mississippi and into the Gulf. Another thing I want to talk about too, we have a lot of people here throwing stones, environmental stones. I remember when I grew up two decades of indiscriminate spraying of DDT where half our songbirds were gone, the American eagle was on the verge of extinction. So I'm just saying before you start throwing ecological stones, you ought to think about things that we can do to change the environment around us. I won't even go into factory farms and the inhumane treatment of animals, of pigs and chickens and the turkeys, and how we have growth hormones, steroids and antibiotics in our food chains now. But at any rate, I hope the State Department approves this permit. Thank you.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker 33.  LINDA BUOY: My name is Linda Buoy, I'm president of the Sand Hills region of the Nebraska Farmers Union. Welcome to the Sand Hills. We have collected over 600 signatures in Rock and Holt County opposing the placement of the Keystone pipeline through the Sand Hills and the Ogallala Aquifer. And an additional 100 signatures. TransCanada to Naper landowner dated July 21, 2010. "This letter is Keystone's final offer. We hope to acquire this property through negotiation. If we are unable to do so, we will be forced to invoke the power of eminent domain, and will initiate condemnation proceedings against this property after the expiration of one month period." The initial easement offer from TransCanada to landowners contained Exhibit B, which listed the legal description of all property owned by the landowner. "South Dakota TransCanada Keystone pipeline LP easement and right-of-way agreement grantor, landowner, may limit his liability by obtaining an insurance policy. The policy shall have a limit of not less than two million dollars." Letter from McGrath North, attorney from TransCanada Keystone Pipeline to Holt County Attorney. "If the Board were to adopt the ordinance in its current form without curing the deficiencies, Keystone would be forced to seriously consider initiating litigation to protect its interests." According to a TransCanada analysis, this strategy for the Keystone XL pipeline would raise Canadian oil prices by three dollars per barrel overall, and six-fifty-five per barrel in the Midwest. A refinery expert and an economist have confirmed that this would cause a seven to 15-cent increase respectively for each gallon of gas made from that oil. The bottom line is Keystone XL pipeline will cost the Americans up to four billion more each year for the same Canadian oil we are already buying. Farmers, ranchers, consumers and businesses in the Midwest would incur the brunt of this cost. This is United States of America. I find it appalling a foreign corporation can come into our country, dictate to Nebraska farms and ranches they will operate an 1833-mile crude oil pipeline, and the path of that pipeline will cross your property. We have seen the true face of TransCanada, a foreign corporation that will use questionable and deceptive tactics to further its greed-based agenda. This is not our friendly neighbor furnishing oil to the United States. Thank you. And I have the accompanying documentation for everything I said, and I will put it in the box.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Speaker number 34.  WADE PILGREEN: Hello. My name is Wade Pilgreen, a 31-year member of Pipeliners Local Union 798, which has a total of 6800 members. I proudly say I am a paid official here to represent the 6800 members that are currently spread across this country building the infrastructure to provide this state and 49 more states the avenue to have gas, diesel and natural gas shipped to them. I appreciate the time the State Department has allowed me to speak on this topic. I do realize this is a passionate topic for both sides, and I truly believe working together we can get through this process with everyone involved getting good results in the end. I do know everyone in this room is concerned about the safety and environmental issues of the Keystone XL pipeline, but I know without a doubt we will build it better than any pipeline to date. I have been involved in the pipeline industry for many years, and know these pipelines are built to the highest standard with good quality, highly certified welders from our union. We do care about the communities that these pipelines run through. But I know everything that our forefathers have done way before my time has involved some risk to get to where we are today. The invention of electric per se. If it were stopped, there would be no way to pump water and raise crops. Even the building of this pipeline someone somewhere, even if moved will have to assume some risk. But if we do not take some risk in this country, this country will become stagnant. There have been way too many projects stopped across this country. We need these projects and if they are stopped, that means these corporations will leave and take these projects overseas, thus making us more dependent on foreign countries, and thus them telling us how we live here in America. When this oil is shipped overseas, do you think it will be refined in a more environmentally sound manner? No. We need to keep it here, refine it in the best possible way; put people back to work and keep America moving forward. America has let way too many jobs slip away to the foreign countries. This needs to stop. When jobs are moved overseas, we're then obligated to send troops to these areas to protect our interests. Then they ultimately -- they are the ones that take the big risk. So this is why I support the Keystone XL pipeline, and believe this project needs to go and it needs to go now. Thanks.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker number 35.  TRACY THOMPSON: Hello, I'm Tracy Thompson. I grew up on a ranch south of Stuart, Nebraska. The Keystone XL pipeline's current route, if approved, is crossing this ranch. I am also a registered nurse and I have several concerns associated with the construction of a tar sand pipeline. The not if but when a spill of tar sand occurs, the devastation to not only our way of life, our precious water, the Ogallala Aquifer. This has the potential to destroy the water supply from here to the eastern part of the state. Keystone XL said they will not tell us what chemicals are added to the tar sands as this is their trade secret. Our government has established laws to protect people who come into contact with chemicals of any kind, so hospitals and poison control centers nationwide can treat victims exposed to chemicals rapidly and correctly. How can a company in another nation come into the United States and not have to follow our laws and safety procedures? Not knowing what chemical the compounds added to the tar sands makes it impossible to test for water contamination let alone treat the victims. Why are we not looking more into green renewable energy that is better for our future and the environment? I feel allowing a foreign nation to be able to enter the United States for their and other foreign governments' financial gain, while the United States is left with the devastation of our land, water, way of life, and ultimately paying for their pipeline expenses and higher taxes and fuel expenses, I feel there is just no justification for allowing this pipeline if you research the fragility of the Sand Hills. Once you break the topsoil and add heat to this pipeline, the topsoil will continue to blow. If you do not understand the Sand Hills, there are blowouts older than I am. Even with the conservation efforts, these blowouts will take centuries to recover if ever. Is the pipeline being constructed for the oil and financial gain of foreign countries at the expense of the United States' largest, safest drinking water supply, economy, environment, agricultural production and increase in health- related illness both in humans and livestock?  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker number 36.  ROBERT WILDS: Thank you for the opportunity to provide my testimony on the Keystone XL project. My name is Robert Wilds. I am a special pipeline representative of the International Union of Operating Engineers. The International Union of Operating Engineers represents 400,000 construction workers in this country. Contractors that employ the operating engineers and the other crafts are represented here tonight, have constructed over 30,000 miles of pipeline in the past ten years. I did have a prepared statement. I'm going to stray away from it a little bit. If I run out of time, I run out of time. First thing I'd like to do, I'd like to thank all you farmers and ranchers in here. Every time I sit down at my dinner table I thank the Lord for the American farmer. Now for me, I've been in the pipeline industry for 25 years. I've worked in over 20 states. I did a stint overseas. In the 25 years I've been pipelining, I have seen the pipeline construction from one end to the other, from the clearing to the final restoration and everything in between. And over those 25 years, I have seen it get safer and safer and safer. Everything that is done, every project, something new has come up to make the pipeline safer and more environmentally friendly. What that being said, I'll try to continue on here. Keystone XL project will create thousands of jobs in the construction and manufacturing industry at a time that our construction industry and economy really need a boost. These workers will spend their wages from this project in many communities along the pipeline route, giving the local economy some needed revenue, not to mention creating more jobs, means more tax revenue and more benefits for our communities. The seven billion dollar private sector project will be built without the use of public funds. This pipeline will not only carry Canadian crude, it will pick up crude from North Dakota and Montana, and carry it down to the refineries in Texas. The Department of Transportation statistics show that pipelines are the safest and most economical and ecological way to transport crude oil and natural gas across the land. Keystone XL project will be regulated by the Department of Transportation. The company will also be mandated by the Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration and incorporate 57 special conditions along the whole pipeline route, conditions to which no other whole pipeline in this country is subject to, from special construction techniques to enhanced specifications and design and materials. These conditions insure the commitment to safety by all parties involved in the construction and operation and regulation of this project. The environmental review is clear that this pipeline will improve the environment and the safety of the general public. It will also reduce our dependence on heavy crude oil from unstable foreign countries. That of course improves our national security.  
MS. HOBGOOD: If you could wrap up your comments.  ROBERT WILDS: On behalf of the International Union of Operating Engineers and the 400,000 members of the Operating Engineers, I respectfully request Department of State please approve this permit.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker number 37.  SCOTT BOETTCHER: Thank you. I'm Scott Boettcher, Sand Hills rancher. My grandparents built our ranch up in the Dirty '30s when the Sand Hills were a Great American Desert or a sea of sand. And look at it today with two years of bountiful rains, a little too much at times. It's a flowing sea of grass. This has taken our ranch 80 years to transform and three generations of lots of daylight- to-dark hours, along with disappointments and heartaches. We know Mother Nature can take this all away in a heartbeat with prairie fires, hailstorms, tornadoes, harsh winter blizzards or drought like our neighbors to the south have seen this year. So why would we want to threaten our livelihood with this pipeline? For all the people of this country that don't realize that this big 36-inch pipe buried three to four foot underground, and deeper, will not make it safer in our wetlands. It's not just a small eight or ten-inch line, so a spill would be magnified greatly compared to the previous spills in existing pipelines. So how can our educated people in the EPA studies of the Ogallala Aquifer say they couldn't find any problems going through the Sand Hills. You ruin the water in the Sand Hills and you might as well let it go back to the Great American Desert of the '30s. And being good stewards of the land for the last 80 years will be wasted. The Sand Hills are a fragile environment, and man's stupidity can change it back into a desert. Our cattle and wildlife will drink surface water when it's available. They don't always drink at the windmills and stock tanks. And if a spill or the smallest leak happens, and they admit there will be, anything that drinks this surface water can become contaminated. They keep telling us there will be no environmental impact so who do you think was paid off in this study? The people of this state should decide where this pipeline goes, not the U.S. State Department. We are the taxpayers who live here, work the land and know what the environmental impact of a spill would be to our land and water. Put this pipeline where the first line went through Nebraska and it will be safer for the people, our cattle industry, wildlife, and our Great American Desert the Sand Hills. Thank you.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker number 38.  SCOTT RAMSHAW: Good evening, my name's Scott Ramshaw, I'm with the Missouri Iowa Nebraska Kansas pipe trades. We're also affiliated with United Association of Plumbers, Pipefitters and Sprinkler Fitters. I'm speaking on behalf of our 13,000 members of the main pipe trades. We support the Keystone project. The Keystone pipeline would create approximately 13,000 construction jobs totally, 7,000 manufacturing jobs and over 118,000 spinoffs in job- related sectors. The project is funded with private sector dollars at no cost to the taxpayers. This billion dollar investment will play an important role in our national security and our national economy. The taxes paid will benefit state, local governments along with school districts and fire districts. In today's economy, whether nationally, state or local, all of us are connected through the national economy and now the global economy. The U.S. infrastructure is vital to our national welfare, whether a nuclear power plant, whether a coal fire plant, refinery, water treatment facility, sewage treatment plant, ethanol, biodiesel, cellulosic plant, manufacturing plant, shopping mall, grocery store, gas stations, cities and towns, along with agricultural plays an important role in our everyday lives. These facilities create jobs. All type of energy crosses U.S. every day. Some infrastructure can be seen along highways and roads. Coal, chemical and fuels along with agriculture move across America every day, whether highways or rails or along the waterways. As much infrastructure that is visible, much infrastructure is not. Many pipelines cross the U.S. every day. Pipelines play an important role in our everyday lives. Let's get America back to work. Thank you.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker number 39.  BRUCE BOETTCHER: Bruce Boettcher, fourth generation rancher, lifelong resident of Sand Hills. I had the privilege of speaking to you in Lincoln and I thank you. I listened to speakers who represent labor unions of 125,000 or more, scientists, presidents, geologists and many others. But I am here as one, a steward of this fragile ecosystem that scientists can't even agree upon the ill effects of this pipeline. To put it in simple terms, it took 40 years to determine if you live west of the pipeline you're safe, but if you live east of the pipeline you're screwed. What kind of science is that? The EPA and the EIS reports have no wrong findings, so the stewards of this land are the only ones who really understand the water, the land, the soils, the plants, the wildlife and the livelihood which it takes to live here and make a living. We learn sometimes the long way around is the safest and the best bet. Common sense tells us you should not put a toxic pipeline through the heart of the Ogallala Aquifer and expect to sustain life for the next generations. Based on TransCanada's integrity of bribing, soliciting eminent domain and all the other underhandedness, the routing of this pipeline should not be of their choice, nor should it be that of the U.S. Department of State. The EPA has no wrong findings on the proposed routing, and evidently there was no wrong findings on the Keystone 1 pipeline routing. So if the Nebraska Unicameral cannot come to a decision on the routing of this pipeline to a safe place, then the people of Nebraska should be the ones to decide the safe route of this pipeline to protect our water. I ask the U.S. Department of State to deny this permit unless TransCanada is willing to go around the Ogallala Aquifer. And I ask TransCanada respectfully to replace this pipeline next to Keystone 1. This is America. This is American soil. We are Americans. This is our water, the American people's water.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker number 40.  KEN TRIVELY: Hi, my name's Ken Trively. I'm a member of the Laborer's Local 1140. There will be manufacturing jobs here in the U.S. that will benefit from the construction of the Keystone XL pipeline through the purchase of parts and equipment. So I would like you to endorse this pipeline. Thank you.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker number 41.  ERIN FRANK: Hello, my name's Erin Frank, and my family farms and ranches in Rock County, just down the road from here. I'm proud to say that I'm from a farm and ranch in the Sand Hills, and I'm proud to say that I'm going to be moving back before I'm 30. I'm 25 right now. Every time I come home; every time I come home I'm so excited and I'm more happy and more sure of my decision to do that. But now I'm scared and now I'm mad that what am I coming home to. What are we doing to our future generations? And it's not something that I agree with, and it's not something that most of the people in this room agree with. It really is encouraging that so many people came together today in opposition of the pipeline. And I ask you to deny TransCanada's permit. I'm going to read a poem now, it's entitled "Prairie," and it's in Twyla Hansen's book "Potato Soup." Poet and horticulturist Twyla Hansen was raised in Northeast Nebraska on land her grandparents farmed in the late 1800s, as immigrants from Denmark. "Prairie." "There are those who think the prairie unimportant, but this place where soil and deep- rooted grasses meet carries on, where hawks loop low into wind without wing beat, where owls hid in cottonwoods, where dickcissels and a swaying landscape cling to seed heads, where the sun to dictate each day rises due east. "Now this remnant, now that, patches here and again across the plains where great animals roamed, bones and blood of ancestors purloined for study, an entire region steeped in history; tribes and traditions and burial sites; hunting grounds and gather places; a civilized nation filled with story and survival dismissed as prehistoric, pre-European, presettlement, preplow, pregrazing, prefences, prerifle. "A stiff breeze further bends the blanched grass blades. Hairy sumac seeds, brown-headed lespedeza, underfoot matted thatch, beyond switchgrass. And overhead big bluestem, the cause of blackbirds tossed into untamed air. "I cannot walk easily over this thick muslin. I am hungry to remain, to get away, thirsty that these roots horde all moisture, poor in spite of verdant topsoil. I lie at ground level carrying on, my face not at odds with just now the rising sun." Thank you.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker 42.  JERRY SMITHBERG: Hello, my name is Jerry Smithberg from Plattsmouth,  Nebraska. I'm a member of the Laborers Local 1140, which covers the  state of Nebraska and Western Iowa. A construction job always has a  start date and a finish date, so basically you're working yourself out of a job. That's just the nature of the construction industry. But any job, no matter how its length is better than no job at all, especially a job that pays a living wage and allows you to not just get by, but actually allow you to support your household. I believe this nation was built on taking risk. I believe the benefits outweigh the risk. While in Lincoln Tuesday, I heard a lot of good things from the environmentalists. They felt very confident that this is going to be  a safe job. Thank you.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker number 43.  SUSAN LUEBBE: Hello, my name is Susan Strocka Luebbe. I am a third generation rancher. We raise Black Angus cattle on a ranch where the pipeline is proposed to go, on our land 13 miles southwest of this gym. We have refused to sign. We as Nebraskans know this tar sands pipeline is not in the best interest of the United States, our state of Nebraska or here in Holt County. I ask you, Madame Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, to deny this pipeline permit. We are an agricultural state. We feed the world. And without clean water, our way of life as we know it will cease to exist. Our land will be worthless when any leak occurs. It makes me shudder to think the chemicals mixed with this heavy sands crude would be flowing into our property, our water and destroy our way of life here in the Sand Hills. This is a land where many generations tough it out. The children are worried about their future here in Nebraska as they see us adults fight tooth and nail against this foreign corporation that continues to wipe out people's love and trust. There's no economic stimulus or job security in the world worth risking the greatest natural resource in Nebraska. TC infatuates the truth saying this is a good deal. Since when do lies telling us we are one of four left to sign in the state of Nebraska? Threats of eminent domain, where we will have no compensation for our property and no protection. Brainwashing that this is the best pipeline they'll ever build. Forging of an easement contract, showing us a copy of our neighbor's check, scaring cattle through fences with their helicopters, badgering rest home landowner residents with eminent domain and no protection for their ground, constitutes a deal for every man, woman and child from Canada to Texas. It has become painfully aware that you are not a friendly neighbor, Mr. Harper, or could the rush to acquire easements be because your Keystone XL permit in Canada ran out last March? Why would it be in the nation's best interest to let TC collapse our local economy, ruin our roads, poison our water and tear up our Sand Hills, and have no long term economic stimulus for Nebraska or its workforce? It is a fact that the first Keystone pipeline had 14 leaks the first year alone. The amount of jobs supposedly touted will not overall stimulate anything long term for our own economy here in the Sand Hills. If you think 20,000 jobs or whatever figure you use for that day, will transform this nation, you TransCanada are full of bull. What we will ruin by building this proposed pipeline, you may as well give it to these union workers from out of state and save everyone the hassle. All that money you have given to charity, ads, the media, busing in workers around, could have been used just a little wiser, like to reroute the pipeline. I guess if you got it, flaunt it should be TransCanada's new motto. Union workers at the Lincoln meeting stated if they were not paid, they would not have come. And more embarrassing is some of them did not even know this pipeline was for oil. They thought it was a gas line. Your lack of PR is astonishing. If you want to stimulate jobs, come to our ranches. You can breathe clean air, drink clean water and eat the best beef in the world, all thanks to what is floating below us. Your jobs will not be temporary like this pipeline is. There are generations of farmers and ranchers just like ours in need of extra hired help. We don't go on our neighbor's ground trespassing because we have billions in our pockets. To the employees of TC. When you knock on heaven's door, do you really think God will say job well done? I'm pretty sure there's a spot reserved for people like you that treat other humans as bad as you have.  
MS. HOBGOOD: If you can wrap up your comments.  SUSAN LUEBBE: Thank you. In closing, I would like to say a huge thank you to Bill McAllister and his staff, to the State Department officials, and finally thanks to all you citizens for supporting the landowners in Nebraska. Have a safe trip home. Thank you.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Speaker 44.  ANNA KOEPPEL: Good evening, my name is Anna Koeppel and I'm a member of the laborers union. I came here today from our office in Omaha because I believe it is in our national interest to build this pipeline. Today our greatest need as a country is investment in our economy and our workforce, and the pipeline offers that. I urge you to approve this pipeline. Thank you.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker number 45.  ALLAURA LUEBBE: Hi. My name is Allaura Luebbe and I'm 16 years old, and a junior at Stuart Public High School. I live on my family ranch south of Stuart where the proposed pipeline is to go through. I am opposed to this pipeline because to me it seems like a sick and twisted deal in the way TransCanada acts and how the pipeline will affect the future of the land, water and its people. I've listened to my mother talk about how a worker from TransCanada came out to our ranch and tried to get my grandfather, Bert Strocka to sign an easement contract. After listening to my mother I thought, I can't believe that someone can lie as much as that TransCanada worker did. Some other things I would like to touch upon is first, the money. A lot of it seems to me that it is about the money. First, I know people obviously work for money, but there are so many other good jobs that deal with taking -- that don't deal with taking people's land and way of life. After all, money doesn't buy anybody's happiness. Second is the lies. I know the difference between right and wrong, and I honestly don't know how people who work and run TransCanada look in the mirror and think what they are doing is right. Third is our water. People live on water and without it we would die. And there's only so much fresh water in the world. I have a sister that when she goes to college she takes milk jugs of water back with her. And if the pipeline is put in, when the benzene oil that is mixed with the tar sands leaks, it will cause health problems like cancer. Like many others, I don't bust my butt off to take care of our livestock and land just to have a foreign company come onto my family's ranch and tear it up. I strongly urge you not to let the Keystone pipeline XL come into the U.S. Thank you.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker number 46.  TERRENCE WHITE: Hello. Please give our regards to Secretary Hillary Clinton, Vice President Biden, and the President. Hi. My name is Terrence White, I'm from Omaha, Nebraska. I am a member of the Laborers Local 1140. Laborers Local 1140 is part of the Midwest Region, Great Plains District Council. This council includes our locals, locals from South Dakota, Iowa, Illinois. As the region in the council we stand in solidarity with our fellow brothers and sisters. When fellow laborers need support we come together as one. So I along with my fellow brothers and sisters are here in support of the Keystone XL pipeline. Thank you.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker number 47.  KARL CONNELL: Thank you for coming here to the state of Nebraska to listen to all our concerns. I'm Karl Connell, I live north in Newport, Nebraska, on the Niobrara in Keya Paha County. We have approximately 3,000 feet of the proposed Keystone pipeline that will cross our property. Two different parcels are involved, a parcel in the pasture with water wells and a hay meadow. These parcels have sandy soil. After the topsoil has been removed and stockpiled the sand will be exposed. Wind will cause the sand to blow and erosion will take place, and that will create a blowout. My concern is that TransCanada does not have the capability to restore the right-of-way back to preconstruction condition that they have no experience and no how to handle this fragile ecosystem. They have said it will take three to five years. Wrong. It takes decades to heal a blowout, the loss of production of grass and grazing over that time and the expense to restore my property once TransCanada leaves. The 150-degree oil in the pipeline concerns me. The heated soil will probably not let grass grow and thrive like it did before the construction of the pipeline. My water well is within a thousand feet of the right-of-way, this is also of a concern. It is the sole source of water for that pasture. If a leak occurs, my well is contaminated. Drilling a new well would be another expense to me. A leak in the pipe would also contaminate the shallow groundwater with toxic tar sands oil. From my research, I have learned about the tar sands oil. It is a diluted -- is the diluted bitumen a safe and secure stream of crude oil? No. This oil contains more acid and sulphur and the chemicals of benzene, arsenic, heavy metals and natural gas condensates than conventional oil does. It's thick and has to be heated to 150 degrees and pressurized up to 1400 pounds to get a flow down the pipe. I don't feel this is safe. It's a big leak waiting to happen. A leak could contaminate the Ogallala Aquifer at any time or place along the route. We can't afford that. It supplies 80 percent of the drinking water in Nebraska, and provides irrigation for farms. And if it is contaminated would be an economic disaster to the State of Nebraska. I don't trust TransCanada. We have been threatened with eminent domain if we don't sign the easement. This is nothing more than theft of my property by a foreign company. Different groups of people have come through our property without permission numerous times doing work for TransCanada, that's trespassing on private property. I feel I've been lied to by TransCanada over and over. I don't believe that Keystone XL will lessen our dependency on foreign oil. This is an export pipeline from Alberta, Canada, to Port Arthur, Texas. When the crude oil gets to Texas the crude and all the refined products become an international commodity and goes to the highest bidder, most likely to Europe or Latin American countries. Valero, the key customer for the oil firm Keystone XL, will refine the crude oil and export it in a foreign trade zone. This company's business operates tax-free, no money goes to any U.S. treasury. Most of their refined fuel will never get into the fuel tanks of U.S. vehicles. TransCanada figures for jobs created in Nebraska I feel have been exaggerated. Maybe 200 at the most workers will be out of state.  
MS. HOBGOOD: If you can wrap up your comments.  KARL CONNELL: My research has proved to me that the State Department has a conflict of interest with TransCanada and Entrix, which has written all the EIS studies. TransCanada is Entrix's main client. The state of Nebraska needs to do their own work. Former campaign manager of Senator Hillary Clinton, Paul Elliott, is now a paid lobbyist for TransCanada. That also spells a conflict of interest to me. Fuel consumption in the United States is due down to production of high mileage vehicles and our slow economy. Our own domestic oil production is booming. We are awash in crude oil, but the price at the pump has not gone down at least, it's not even staying the same or it goes up. What's wrong with this picture? TransCanada has said we need this pipeline for energy security. This is not energy security for the U.S., but economic security for big oil in Canada and U.S. This pipeline is not in the best interest of the people in Nebraska or the U.S. We don't need the Keystone XL pipeline. I totally oppose the construction of Keystone XL pipeline with its contents of toxic, corrosive tar sands oil, and ask that you deny this permit. Thank you.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker number 48.  DAVE HUTCHINSON: I'm Dave Hutchinson and we have an all-organic ranch, and I'd like to invite anybody with the State Department, if they would walk five miles through the wet areas of this ground, I will cook an all-organic meal for each one of you. Our organic ranch is a family ranch and we raise beef, buffalo, goats. We've also raised organic squash and potatoes. And again, if you just walk through; these engineers and these biologists, these geologists, if they would have walked through this area they would have understood the high water tables, the flow well, the artesian water, the lakes. And when you dig some of this area up you will create more surface water, not less because of the pressure under the ground. And it's not if the pipeline's going to leak, it's when. Our certifier of our organic ranch has notified us that when that leaks, we will lose our certification. Not to mention the pollution that will become in the water, that will affect the people in the cities like Omaha, Lincoln, Kansas City, and your smaller cities like Fremont, Columbus, Grand Island and Norfolk. I'm opposed to the route of this Keystone pipeline. Thank you.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker number 49.  DAVE HUTCHINSON: I'm available for that dinner by the way.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Speaker number 49.  MARILYN LUND: Hello and welcome. I'm Marilyn Lund from Bassett, Nebraska. I'm a farmer rancher's wife, mother of two and grandmother of seven. My concerns are safety and cost. Because the pipeline will carry tar sands crude oil in an abrasive and corrosive mix that requires very high operating temperatures, and much higher pressure than conventional crude, there are great risks of ruptures, corrosion and leaks. This raw heavy crude carries toxins, heavy metals including arsenic, benzene and dangerous chemicals which will cause serious health problems for nearby populations if there is a spill or leak into our Ogallala Aquifer. If these poisons get into our aquifer, it could jeopardize Nebraska's drinking water and agricultural and irrigating abilities. The pipeline should not be located close to the Ogallala Aquifer. Another safety concern is the high temperature to transport this heavy crude. The industry defines a high-pressure pipeline as one that operates at over 600 psi. The maximum allowed is 1308 psi. TransCanada has asked for a waiver to allow 1,440 pounds per square inch for the Keystone XL pipeline. The United States has developed safety and spill response standards to regulate pipeline transport of conventional crude, not this heavy raw tar sands crude. Without public knowledge or upgrade in safety standards, exports to the United States of this heavy acidic crude have increased fivefold and will be tripled by 2019. Also, the TransCanada Keystone pipeline is a seven billion project and we will be paying for it. When TransCanada applied for their pipeline permit at the Canadian National Energy Board, they presented a strategy that basically turns oversupply into undersupply by bypassing Midwest states to ship tar sands crude oil to refineries in Gulf ports, in Texas and export it. As oil imports are shifted from the Midwest to Texas, oil supplies will decline. With an undersupply created in the 15 Midwest states, the seven oil companies and TransCanada will raise oil prices by $6.55 per barrel, which is a 15 cent per gallon increase. Americans will pay up to four billion more each year for the same Canadian oil we are buying now. Canadian oil producers get huge profit windfalls and the 15 Midwest states get high gas prices. Adding to the route of the Keystone pipeline does not reduce our oil independence. Huge amounts of this refined product will be exported, meaning the finished product is not needed here. At present, there is enough pipeline capacity between Canada and the Midwest states to handle whatever Canada might produce, even allowing a huge increase in production. With the estimated 750 jobs in Nebraska, not all are permanent, will that be proportionate to the increase in fuel taxes that will continue for ten years or longer? For these and other critical reasons, the Keystone XL pipeline definitely is not in the public interest. I respectfully request that the Keystone XL pipeline permit be denied.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker number 50. Speaker number 50. Speaker number 51.  JO STEC: Good evening. My name is Jo Stec. I'm a fourth generation rancher on a ranch that has been active for 98 years.  
MS. HOBGOOD: If you can speak into the mic.  JO STEC: Start over? Anyway, I'm a fourth generation rancher and I'm on a ranch that's been active for 98 years. I live south of Long Pine. I'm a member of Kappa Kappa Iota, which is a national teachers' organization. I am a member of farmer's union, ARCAF and the Independent Cattlemen of Nebraska. On October 23rd of 2010, in North Platte, Nebraska, the ICON organization held its national meeting. We passed resolution number nine for 2010, and I would like to read that to you. "Whereas the TransCanada Keystone XL petroleum pipeline has been routed through the Nebraska Sand Hills and across the Ogallala Aquifer; and whereas the Ogallala Aquifer is the most valuable asset to the economy of Nebraskan people; and whereas the proposed route of the pipeline would endanger the purity of the Ogallala Aquifer in the event of a pipeline default. "Therefore be it resolved ICON opposes the projected route and proposes that the TransCanada Keystone XL petroleum pipeline acquire an alternate route to bypass the Nebraska Sand Hills, the Ogallala Aquifer." On a personal note, I would like to add that I realize the Sand Hills ecology is very fragile. The Ogallala Aquifer is priceless for its water that it provides for many states, and I sincerely hope personally that an alternate route can be found. Thank you very much.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker 52. Speaker 52. Speaker 53.  FREDERICK PINKLEMAN: I'm Frederick Pinkleman from Wynot, Nebraska, a recovering ex- county commissioner. My third term ended this past January and I didn't refile. I served as a Cedar County Commissioner in 1999 when TransCanada constructed the pipeline through Cedar County. Yesterday Jeff Rowe called and asked if I'd attend this meeting in Atkinson to express my observations after working with TransCanada as they constructed the crude oil pipeline through Cedar County. If my memory serves me right, Jeff was one of the folks from TransCanada that came before the board to announce their plans to build a pipeline. They were always courteous and informative, and did what they said they were going to do. Our county attorney drew up a work agreement which addressed liability and damage issues, haul routes and so on. The contractors doing the work were very professional and easy to work with. I was amazed that I didn't receive one constituent complaint as the construction work was being done. If they damaged our roads during wet spells, I'd call and request that they gravel or blade them. And they always performed the needed maintenance. They always made sure that we commissioners had the phone numbers of who to call if we needed to contact them about anything. To sum up my thoughts, I wouldn't have driven 125 miles to come out here today if I weren't convinced that TransCanada is a responsible company doing all that is humanly possible to construct a safe and necessary pipeline. And I would add that I'm in no position to comment on the location of this particular pipeline. Thank you.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker number 54.  MEGAN HARDY: Hello. My name is Megan Hardy from Bellevue, Nebraska. I and my husband are laborers from Local 1140. In our house we get excited when we hear about a construction job starting up. It means a consistent paycheck where we don't have to worry about how we're going to live. Although we know eventually the job will end, we have the hope another job will be ready to start up. So I am here today to support the Keystone XL pipeline project, and the living wage jobs it will create. And I ask that the State Department support this project also. Thank you.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speak number 55.  MARTY COBENAIS: Hi. My name's Marty Cobenais, I work with the Indigenous Environment Network out of Bemidji, Minnesota. One of my jobs is to fight this pipeline, but I also work with tribes along the route. And just yesterday at the Great Plains Travel Leaders Association they passed a resolution opposing this pipeline, as have numerous other tribes along the route, individual tribes. NCAI, National Congress of American Indians has passed a resolution opposing this pipeline. All the tribes up in Canada have opposed this pipeline, and also the tar sands.  MARTY COBENAIS: Here are some of my concerns along with my workers and my coworkers. I am going to start with a quote from Crazy Horse. What he says is, "My lands are where my dead lie buried." That is very concerning to us. This goes through cultural historical preservation lands. We have burial sites along this route. We have very high cultural sites along this route. During the Keystone 1 pipeline in Nebraska just south -- when it first crossed into Nebraska, they discovered seven bodies along the pipeline route. This did not stop this pipeline from going through. What they did was they stopped production. They notified the local authorities. They started doing another dig to see how many bodies were there. The problem with that is once you move those bones or you tamper with them, it is not a national historical site. Those bodies were removed and those bodies are now sitting in the Nebraska Historical Society. They were non-Native. They were considered to be Caucasian pioneers. But that is how this is handled. It's not right. The second quote I want to do is from Red Cloud, he's a Lakota Sioux. "They made us promises more than I can remember, but they kept only one. They promised to take our land and they did." Why is that important to us? This doesn't go through any Reservation land, but it goes through Nebraska and it goes through farmers, landowners. These people are the modern day Indians. These people their land is being threatened to be taken away and be paid pennies on the dollar for what it's worth. They are our modern day Indians. What this actually comes down to is that this is economic blackmail that goes on through everybody. The city, the counties, the states, the landowners, it's basically TransCanada buying their way through promising jobs, promising road improvements, promising schools and everything else. That is the only way they're getting through this. If it was on just merit, they would not get this pipeline. Where this pipeline is made. We have heard from several of the union workers talking about this is going to be American made and everything else. In the public hearing -- the EIS comment hearing in Washington, D.C., the owner of the pipeline company that is putting this together from Arkansas, stated this pipe will be made from Chinese steel again. This is not going to be. So I asked the workers here, why are you not supporting the steel workers unions. Because they are not here. You guys aren't using American steel, so why are you supporting this project? You should be supporting your brothers and sisters.  
MS. HOBGOOD: If you can wrap up your comments.  MARTY COBENAIS: One more point really. Nebraskans were out in Washington, D.C., and met with Dan McLewen, one of your bosses. In that meeting, Dan McLewen said this oil will not be staying in the United States. This will be shipped overseas. This is a State Department official saying that. That is wrong. Even Secretary Clinton has said that she's inclined to sign off on this. My final statement is going to be this, and it's a quote. "Let's put our minds together and see what life we can make for our children." That was Sitting Bull. This is what we're talking about here. In 150 years, in our traditional cultural thinking, we're supposed to think out 150 years to see what this is supposed to be like and make this decision. In 150 years we won't have a pipeline. We won't have oil. So right now we need to say no to this pipeline. So therefore, I am telling you please do not pass this pipeline. Also, next week we have tribal leadership coming to Washington, D.C., and we are requesting a meeting with Secretary Clinton in person, not with an aide or Dan McLewen. We've already heard from them. We want to meet with Hillary Clinton, herself. Thank you.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker number 56.  DAVID HAYES: Good evening, Madame Chairman. My name is David Hayes. I'm an international representative for the Laborers International Union of North America. I'm a member of Laborers Local 1140 out of Omaha, and a resident of Bellevue, Nebraska. We've heard some testimony today from a variety of people talking about the construction of the pipeline, how it's done first class and safe. Part of my duties have been recently assigned to a committee to update the training manuals for the Laborers International Union, the Pipeline Contractors Association, working with our contractors and with our international unions across the country. One of the things we're focusing on, that we haven't discussed today, is the personal safety of the workers on the construction of the pipeline. And it may be one of the few things that we have in common in the room today with our ranchers and the farmers and the construction workers. As OSHA tracks occupations that are dangerous, these are probably the top three occupations in terms of personal safety to the worker on the job. So part of the things we're doing today is updating our manual and not just bringing up the technology that's current for today, but we're also going over every hazard assigned to every task. It's important for us at the end of the day that our workers go home to their families. We support this pipeline and I thank you for the opportunity.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker number 57.  FRANK LAMIRE: Thank you very much. My name is Frank Lamire. I'm a member of the Winnebago Tribe of Nebraska, and I reside in South Sioux City. I was born in Nebraska and I plan on dying here. I oppose this pipeline for many reasons, not the least of which is that covenants have been made, prior to others coming here, about how we would be good stewards of the land. And I want to share with you that it was the Pawnee, the Ponca, the Otu Missouri, the Omaha, the Dakota and my own Winnebago people who first offered up petitions and prayers to the Creator of all things asking that we be given bountiful harvest, plentiful game, shelter from the elements, and most importantly water. The water that we would need to live, to grow and to flourish. I want to tell you that covenants have been made and covenants must be respected. I would share with the union brethren that I have stood with many times, and I will stand with them again. Our Omaha relatives were here earlier and I've stood with my relatives, the Omahas, and I will stand with them again. But I'll not stand with either tonight because I'm going to stand with my grandchildren, who reside in Oklahoma, half Winnebago, half Comanche, and I want them to live, to grow, to flourish, and to be able to realize those things that I have and others have planned for them. I want to share with you that sometimes when we share indigenous thought like this, people do not understand it. You know, they want to look at things in more practical terms. And if I look at this thing real practically, some things concern me that I wasn't even concerned about tonight. But I got here and I heard one of my neighbors from over this part of the state talked about condemnation, talked about the taking of land. The indigenous people of this continent know about condemnation, and know about the taking of lands. And that, in and of itself, causes me to stand continually in opposition to this. These are my neighbors, they are new stewards of the land.  FRANK LAMIRE: And they must be considered. I would only share with you there are many perspectives here, and I respect all of those as you do. But you know, you're going to go, and I would hope that when you leave here that you would have heard from all of these Nebraskans, and that some of them would have touched you in your heart and in your mind, and that you would carry those things to Washington. I fervently ask you that. Two years ago, I testified before the State Department in Albuquerque because they wanted to know the state of the Indian Nations, and they asked me to come over there. And I was very critical and very hopeful. Nothing happened, absolutely nothing happened. And sadly, I don't expect anything to happen here tonight either. But I would beg you to hear us and convey this for us. Thank you very much.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker 58.  SCOTT GOTSCHALL: My name is Scott Gotschall. Thank you for listening to our comments. I'm sure by now you understand how important the aquifer is to many of us here. The latest environmental review that came out stated that any leak would be limited and minimal. Well, it won't be if you're here. If the leak affects you, it won't be minimal. The cost is too great. I ask you to deny the permit so it can be rerouted over in safer soil, away from the aquifer. The benefit of this would be bringing down an amount of oil that is unrefined, and the amount daily is less than a half a percent of what the United States uses in a day. And that's unrefined, and I'm unable to find out much that would actually be of refined crude. Apparently TransCanada doesn't release that, I don't know. For all the more crude oil we'd actually be getting, I don't understand the reason for the potential cost. So let's give these union people a longer pipeline to build, route it around the Sand Hills, deny the permit. Thank you.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Again I realize how difficult this is, but if you can hold your applause so we can get to as many people as we can. Thank you.  NINA NELSON: I'm Nina Nelson of Clarks, Nebraska, and I'm here to oppose the Keystone XL pipeline. I'm just a concerned citizen in Nebraska. I'm not representing any special group. I grew up in a nearby town and I've always loved the Sand Hills country. For you who are visiting here from the East, it may look like a big wide open space that doesn't amount to much. And if you went out west, you'd probably feel that way even more so. But hopefully you also realize today just how healthy our environment is. We have clean air. We have the wonders of nature, and we have clean water. Yes, clean water that keeps all of our lives alive. We can live without oil, but we can't live without water. Not people, not livestock, not plants. I'd have to say that's the one positive thing TransCanada's done for me. As this debate has livened up, and I've been doing a lot of studying, I came to take time to deeply think about the value of water and just how fortunate we are here in Nebraska to have this precious resource. And of course I'm talking about the Ogallala Aquifer, but also the many rivers that cross our great state. You heard over and over how vital it is to our ag economy, and I'd like to remind you these ranchers and farmers work hard every day seven days a week, 365 days a year, and they don't have anybody guaranteeing them a pension. But they're here to feed the world. Folks bringing the pipeline, they're quick to point out the growing need for more oil products because of course there are more vehicles. But I'd like to remind you that current projections indicate the world population will double in another ten years. We currently are at seven billion people in this world, and not all of this world is growing food. Now in another perspective, that's a lot of McDonald's hamburgers and Frito-Lay corn chips even just in America. And where do you think these ag products come from? They come from beef and corn right here in Nebraska. If we had an underground source of gold over here in the Sand Hills, at $1800 an ounce we wouldn't even be having this conversation. You'd be doing everything possible to make sure not one ounce was confiscated or wasted. Well, we've got something even more precious, we've got the Ogallala Aquifer. It's one of the largest sources of clean, safe water in the world. So I ask you again to deny this pipeline. We can survive without oil, but we cannot survive without water.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker number 60.  K. SHAYMAKER: I also am from this area. I grew up here. I've been up here all my life. I'm a mother, a grandmother, and I would like to put my heart out to the indigenous people who have embraced us today.  K. SHAYMAKER: The Native people of Alberta are dying. Their children are dying. I've been online, I've seen their videos their children have made. It's called "Keepers of the Water." I hear you, Fort Chippewa children. We got to stop tar sands. I applaud our school superintendent, who erected just the 27th, our wind charger here to help alleviate the cost of heating these gymnasiums in which we're gathered today. I urge our country to use wind and solar and renewable energy. As we drive past the ethanol plant, be thankful that we here in this country can grow our fuel. Deny this injustice. My mother has been bullied and been threatened with eminent domain and condemnation, and then stuck with a gag order. This has been three years ago, and just last July I learned about this. I believe that the green gases escaping from Alberta have been the cause of our flooding of the plains. I don't want to sound like a -- I don't know -- excuse me, but I've lived here all my life, and when it clouds up and it rains nine inches of rain out of nowhere, something is going on. I've tried to travel to the East of the United States. I have family in Tennessee, and both times this summer we had to go around Omaha because of all of the flooding. I know the old Sand Hillers know what our climate is like, but the last three years it's been catastrophic, and our Sand Hills cannot withstand the erosion. Thank you.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker number 61.  AUTUMN LEMMER: Hello. My name is Autumn Lemmer, I'm a junior at West Holt High School. I live 25 miles south of Atkinson and the Keystone pipeline route goes straight through my family's ranch. I am very concerned over the proposed route of the Keystone pipeline across Nebraska. I deeply urge you to stop and consider the implications and environmental impact on the Breadbasket of America. During the building phase it will destroy the valuable grasslands of our state along the route. And more importantly, during a leak or spill. Reaching down deep in the very essence of your own being, you know that it is highly probable that at some point we'll be at the crossroads of devastation and destruction. Keystone's track record already shows that it's likely that a spill could tarnish or destroy the entire agricultural industry of Nebraska for generations to come. Keystone takes great pride in itself on the number of jobs it will provide for our state's economy. But at what cost to us later down the line. What happens when the most toxic crude oil, that's not even intended for our state, pollutes our precious Ogallala Aquifer? What will Nebraska do when its agricultural industry can no longer sell their products because the land and water is now tainted with oil. If Keystone insists on crossing Nebraska, wouldn't it make much more sense for them to route the pipeline next to the existing pipeline? I know that when it comes to energy, we need to start making safer decisions that preserve rather than pollute our natural resources. A resource that is contaminated is no longer a use for anyone. I personally am not fond of the idea of a foreign oil company planning to use our precious resource as important as water to pump something that will truly not benefit Nebraska. Jobs in Nebraska are something everyone wants, but permanent jobs in Nebraska are driven by agriculture, not by oil. The Ogallala Aquifer is some of the purest and most valuable water in the world. It is known to store water from the Ice Ages, water that is uncontaminated with today's modern waste. The aquifer already carries a load of 85 percent drinking water for Nebraska and roughly 30 percent for irrigation of our grain and livestock industry. Why chance disrupting and polluting one of the most fragile ecosystems in the United States? As Nebraskans we need to stand up and protect our Ogallala Aquifer for future generations. Growing up as generational ranchers in the heartland of the Sand Hills, we know firsthand what treasure is. Please take action in this sensitive matter and preserve Nebraska and all she has to offer. My generation and those that follow will have to grow up and deal with the problems the pipeline creates. I urge you to stand up and protect the Sand Hills and the Ogallala Aquifer. Thank you.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker number 62.  CATHIE GENUNG: Thank you for the opportunity to be heard. I wish I could use my three minutes to take you outside and breathe the cool Holt County air, listen to the spirits speak in the cottonwood trees, and drink from the artesian wells. But this is for my mom and my sisters. I'm Cathie Genung, resident of Hastings, Nebraska, a 39-year veteran teacher at St. Cecilia High School. My expertise areas are language arts, writing, drama and literature. My degree is from Hastings College, and I have advanced hours from the University of Nebraska and University at Carney. However, I'm more proud to say that my real education began some 60 years ago in a little village 20 miles south in the heart of the Sand Hills. Because of that, I consider myself a fairly wise, well-educated woman. Secretary of State Clinton is also a wise, well-educated woman for you see, she knows that it takes a village to raise a child. A village, a family, a ranching, farming community. It's really all the same. I bet you get the drift of where I'm going with this concept. Let me continue. Another oft heard catch phrase is pay it forward. As a child raised on a ranch near Amelia in Holt County, Nebraska, in the '50s and '60s, many of the people out here were also raised and shaped and nurtured by family, friends and neighbors who lived by the concept of paying it forward. I'm proud to say that my family's hundred- year-old ranch first belonged to my grandparents, my parents, now my mother; next, to me, my five sisters and their families, our children and grandchildren. That's a tremendous legacy upon which cannot put a price. A kind of village if you will. Yes, Nebraskans know what it is to be a village and take care of each other. We pay it forward. My earliest memories of growing up on a ranch in the Sand Hills include both of these ideals because you see, that's the way of life of the ranchers and farmers in a community where strong- willed men and women are stewards of the land and work and play in what we call God's country. As children we were taught to protect the sacredness of the land and her people, and we continue that stewardship. Each generation creates a well store of wisdom that continues to flow to the next. And that legacy must continue. It would be simply unpardonable to allow the land, water and air of this area destroyed. You see, the ancient sacred ways taught us long before our parents and grandparents did. Please do not stop the flow of Nebraska's precious livelihood and stewardship. Please let this nation's people continue to pay it forward to future generations. Please do stop the TransCanadian XL pipeline's current route through the Sand Hills. I firmly believe that God always pays it forward, and I hope we can do the same. Thank you.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker number 63.  ALEXANDRA KERIAKADIS: Today I hoped not to forget my name, Alexandra Keriakadis, formerly of Hay Springs, Nebraska; Sheridan County. I would like to thank the State Department and its representatives for their kind attention. It is truly an honor to be allowed to speak before you. And before I forget this, I would ask your Department to please, please consider denying the permission for this pipeline. Nothing against people who are seeking jobs, I've been seeking one for 11 years. When I find one I'll send up a skyrocket to let you know. In the meantime, I learned something very valuable in my church, and that was to want what you have, do what you can, and be who you are. As TransCanada, I separate that from the people of Canada because I don't like them being demeaned by this Heinz 57 conglomeration of nations who band together for the purpose of expending their profits. As Ron Hubbard, known to you as the father of Scientology would say, make money, make more money. Make other people make money for you. Sick, we don't want to go on with this. I applaud your efforts to find work, to better the lives of your families, and I hate seeing you dragged down by being associated with TransCanada, and as well as the nation of Canada and its good people. But as it says in the Bible, you shall know the truth, and the truth will set you free. We must free ourselves from the death-bringing tar sands and the careless illusion that we have even ten years we can waste before global warming costs us our final breath; droughts, hurricanes, floods, fires, record cold. Do what you can, want what you have. Change the world, you can do it. Band together, birds of a feather. Brainstorm. I bet you can come up with ideas that would bend the world back into shape and supply you with jobs. As Al Gore recently initiated the changing of all windows in the Empire State Building, created I don't know how many jobs that way, but it saved millions in air-conditioning and heating costs. Look at how bad our infrastructure is all over the United States. How many jobs could be created by righting those wrongs and alleviating those shortcomings. I'm sorry that you good people, hard- working, serious family people, are brought down by TransCanada because as we all know, TransCanada's relationship to the truth is as a vampire's is to sunlight.  
MS. HOBGOOD: If you can wrap up your comments I'd appreciate it.  ALEXANDRA KERIAKADIS: I hope I will be allowed to send on my additional comments to the State Department by mail and spare you. Thank you, good day.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker number 64.  CHARISSE NEWTON: Thank you for letting me be here. My name is Charisse Newton, and like many here I have a small farm. I live in Fort Calhoun, and I'm also a member of the Local 1140. And laborers do work on Green projects, and currently we have members working in Iowa on wind turbines, and are doing weatherization training and projects for Western Nebraska at their training facility. We know renewable resources are in our future, but for now we are dependent on oil for our energy needs. So if we are going to get oil, why not get it from our friend and ally? We cannot depend on getting oil from Mexico like they had originally was going to do because they're spending so much money on their battle with the drug cartels. Then you also have to consider all the benefits that the taxes and property taxes that this is going to create, not only for just Nebraska, but for every state that this pipeline goes through, but for the whole United States. So with that, we are all for the pipeline and I hope it passes, and thank you for having me here.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker number 65.  PATRICIA FULLER: Hi, I'm Patricia Fuller. I'm a member of the Sierra Club. The Keystone pipeline would provide a source of crude oil from a friendly, secure supplier. It would also lock the U.S. into one of the most carbon-intense and polluting fuel sources ever extracted. Tar sands crude is a 22 billion dollar business in Canada. The Canadian Energy Research Institute estimates that these tar sands contain 1.7 trillion barrels of heavy crude. Of these they believe they can extract 173 billion barrels that are recoverable. The delay involved in rerouting this pipeline around the Ogallala Aquifer would be very costly to the Canadian industry. The problems with tar sands oil stem from its scale as well as its destructive process necessary to extract, process and deliver its end product. In a permit application by energy giant Shell Oil Company, they described the impact of tar sands strip mining. Effectively, a complete loss of soil and terrain, terrestrial vegetation, wetland, porous resources, wildlife biodiversity, and this happens during the entire period of operation. Just real briefly. To produce one barrel of oil requires digging up approximately four tons of earth, requires three barrels of water, and produces two to three times the amount of CO2 than conventional oil does. End products from this extraction create giant tailing ponds that contain cancer-causing chemicals such as mercury, arsenic, benzene and cyanide. Ponds which according to environmental defense leak one billion gallons per year into the watersheds. Doctors have recorded human health problems in First Nations people living downstreams. Studies have showed that increased cancer rates related to hydrocarbons in patients that have leukemia, lymphomas and biliary duct cancers. Hunters have seen changes in their game. Moose with enlarged white spotted livers, fish with numerous deformities, fish that are showing high mercury levels. Canadian ecologists believe that the tar sands development has led to a permanent loss of 58,000 birds and possibly as many as 400,000. Yet in Canada they dub this as ethical oil. I request that the State Department denies this permit.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker number 66.  TIM ROSEBERRY: Hello, my name is Tim Roseberry. I am with the Laborers International Union of North America. I stand in support of the pipeline. Nebraska needs jobs and Nebraska needs oil. To move corn to market Nebraska needs oil. To move cattle to market Nebraska needs oil. Nebraskans need jobs and Nebraskans need oil. I want to thank you for this opportunity.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker number 67.  BEN GOTSCHALL: Hello and thank you for coming to my hometown. My name is Ben Gotschall. I'm a fourth generation rancher from here in the Sand Hills, Holt County. I graduated from high school in this room, up there on that stage where you're sitting, as did a lot of people who are in this room right now. I'm here because I believe this proposed pipeline route poses a serious threat risk to the Sand Hills in the Ogallala Aquifer. This pipeline is not in our national interest. Increasing our reliance on foreign oil and sacrificing our rights, our water, our land and our health for a foreign company's profits is not in our national interest. Because the proposed route of this pipeline crosses the Sand Hills, because it crosses the recharge zone of the aquifer, and because TransCanada and Cardno Entrix have been unwilling to consider alternate routes, I have no choice but to oppose this pipeline. I ask that you deny the permit. And I think that a lot of people in here talking about how proposed alternate routes are not preferable. Well, the Keystone alternate corridor Route 2 in the Federal Environmental Impact Statement is 212 miles shorter than the proposed route. It follows the existing right-of-way, which it allows for efficiency of safety monitoring. It impacts fewer acres of land and it would affect 19 percent fewer wells. There are also eight other alternative routes that are very poorly designed. So I think that we should look at the one that's the best idea. TransCanada and their supporters say that we who oppose this pipeline are unreasonable, extremist fearmongers. They accuse us of being misguided and of spreading half truths. Well, if we are misguided and spreading half truths, it is because TransCanada has misguided us and has told us only half the truth.  BEN GOTSCHALL: I defy; I defy TransCanada's paid scientists and contractors to show me one study that has been done on a spill in the Ogallala Aquifer. There is no such study that exists. The study that you're basing your information on was done in Bemidji, Minnesota. And isolated as that spill may be, it is long-lasting. It has been 30 years and that oil and those chemicals are still there. And long-lasting spills are just as dangerous as widespread spills. I have been to Marshall, Michigan. I have seen the damage done by the Enbridge diluted bitumen pipeline that happened in July 2010. And I was there a year after that happened and it still wasn't cleaned up. It polluted 40 miles of that watershed. I saw it, I smelled it. I got it on these boots, and it don't wash off. Anyone who says diluted bitumen isn't a threat to water is lying. There are people in Marshall, Michigan, who are sick. There are people in Marshall who are dying from exposure to unknown chemicals. There are people in Marshall who have had dumpsters full of dead birds, semi trailers full of dead animals that were killed by drinking the water. And have seen their neighbors one by one come down with rare disorders and cancers. We need to know what chemicals make up the diluted bitumen. That information is in our national interest, and suppressing it as TransCanada and Entrix have done, is a threat to our national security.  BEN GOTSCHALL: As tragic as that spill was -- as tragic as that spill was and as tragic as the spill in the Yellowstone River was, these provide us with an important opportunity. And they are important because of how environmentally expensive this opportunity is. We have the opportunity to learn about the effects of oil spills and waterways. We have the opportunity to do some serious looking at what happens when this oil and these chemicals get into rivers like the Niobrara, the Elkhorn, the Platte, Holt Creek, and all the other rivers it's going to cross on its way to Texas. There is no reason to rush into building this pipeline when we don't know what can happen to our water and to our people. When TransCanada's paid lobbyists say that this pipeline is safe; when TransCanada's hired experts say there's no threat to the aquifer; when TransCanada's contractor Cardno Entrix says that risks of contamination to the aquifer and damage to the Sand Hills is not significant enough to warrant concern; they're saying something else. They're saying that the people here and our basic human rights, and our basic human needs, and our simple way of life, are of no consequence to them. As a citizen of Nebraska and a person from this community who loves this place, as a human being, I resent that statement. I repudiate it for its arrogance. Arrogance based on ignorance is the chief attitude exuded by TransCanada, its representatives and its hired contractors. They say we just fear tactics to fight their so-called facts, facts that have been bought and paid for to be published and played. I think it is TransCanada who is afraid. They are afraid that all the money they have spent on ad campaigns can't buy them truth. They're afraid that all the money they have spent on lobbyists haven't bought them consent. They are afraid because they can't buy our trust and they have done nothing to earn it.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Can you please wrap up your comments.  BEN GOTSCHALL: Yes.  AUDIENCE MEMBERS: Let him speak. Let him speak.  BEN GOTSCHALL: They are afraid because we refuse to believe the lie that their profits are more important than our basic human rights. Martin Luther King, Jr., said, "Injustice anywhere is a threat to justice everywhere." I agree. The water in this aquifer might be important to us, but soon it will be important to the world.  BEN GOTSCHALL: Thank you. This proposed pipeline is both an injustice and a threat to our water. It is an injustice to the people along its route from First Nations people in Alberta, Canada, whose Athabasca River watershed is being contaminated; to farmers and ranchers here in Holt County, Nebraska, where our Sand Hills would be denuded and polluted. All the way down to people living near refineries in Port Arthur, Texas, whose air will be poisoned by the processing of this dirty oil. Speaking of oil, people who say that we are bound to it are wrong. People who said that we need this oil for our economy or it will fail are wrong. People who say that our country cannot change are using the same rhetoric used to justify slavery. Just as slavery built and fueled the economy of the South and gave way to freedom for African Americans; just as the exploitation of workers who built and fueled our industrial economy gave way to unionization and organized labor, so too, will our addiction to foreign oil give way to energy independence. And to quote a Nebraska State Senator who spoke on Tuesday, Tony Fulton, "The path of energy independence does not run through the Sand Hills." You the union workers can help us. You can help us build wind turbines and solar farms, and hydroelectric generators. You can help us retrofit our houses and retrofit our government buildings and our office buildings. You can help us build more efficient -- you can help us build more efficient engines. You can help us develop solutions that don't take us steps back in centuries. I oppose the proposed Keystone XL pipeline. It is not in the national interest. Its perceived benefits are based on false assumptions, flawed logic and failed rhetoric. I also oppose the use of third-party contractors hired by the corporation that is under review to write our Federal Environmental Impact Statements. I challenge -- I challenge all information in the environmental impact statement that has been written by former TransCanada employees' representatives and representatives of Cardno Entrix. And I thank you for your time.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Let me make just one quick announcement before Speaker 68. Right after Speaker 68 I'd like to take just a five-minute break for our official reporter who needs to make some adjustments to his equipment. Thank you. Speaker 68.  RANDY THOMPSON: You want me to go ahead?  
MS. HOBGOOD: You can go ahead, yes.  RANDY THOMPSON: Thank you for being here. My name is Randy Thompson. I'm from Martell, Nebraska. As I was driving into Atkinson this afternoon, I saw something kind of striking to me. The wind was blowing hard and there was an American Flag on the south side of the highway blowing straight out. As I came into town, the highway was lined with American Flags. But you know what, I did not see one Canadian Flag. So why is a foreign corporation in our country, in our state, dictating to us where they're going to put a giant pipeline? Why are we here tonight defending our property, our resources and our water from a foreign corporation that doesn't even have a permit to be operating in this country yet. They have been allowed to bully and intimidate landowners throughout Nebraska and other states, and no one has done anything about it. So I suggest to you that perhaps it's time that America quits being a doormat and we get some politicians that actually have a backbone. Thank you.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. We'll take a five-minute break and resume with speaker number 69.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Before I ask speaker number 69 to come to the microphone. I would just like to remind everyone that we are really going to try to get through as many speakers as we can, and we can only do that if you respect the time and try and hold your applause, and try and be as succinct as possible. I know this is an extremely important issue to everyone, and that's why you're here. And please take into account the fact that you submit your comments in writing. You can certainly leave them here. You can fax them; you can e-mail them to us. And you can just simply say, if you agree with the previous speaker, that you do agree with the previous speaker. You can state your name and then indicate whether or not you support or oppose the permit. And with that, let me start with Speaker 69. Is speaker number 69 here? Speaker 70. Speaker 71.  KEN WINSTON: Good evening and thank you for being here in Nebraska. My name's Ken Winston, I work with the Nebraska Sierra Club and I'm a native of the Sand Hills. I guess I wanted to start off by making a quick statement. The Sand Hills are as unique as Yellowstone, but they're far more valuable. And why are they so valuable? First of all, by 2040, the demand for food will double. Seventy percent of the water used for food production -- 70 percent of the water used is used for food production. Nebraska is home to the Water For Food Institute. Their primary area of concern is to produce more water with less food -- more food with less water, excuse me. It's late, I'm tired; it's hot in here. Aquifers all around the world are being depleted, including many of them in the United States. One of the few aquifers in the world that has this abundance of water is right here, you're right on top of it, right in Nebraska, in the Sand Hills. We need this water. People all over the world will thank us if this water is preserved. If it's degraded, it will be of no use. This pipeline is a vestige of an energy policy that led to the economic collapse in 2008. We need policies that will take us forward, not backward. One of the things I want to talk about, I want to just run through a few things, and Ben started on this just a few minutes ago. But there have been a lot of things that have been said that we're spreading fears about -- and why are people so afraid about protecting the aquifer. Well, the fears are based on facts. First of all, it's been said that there are oil pipelines through the Ogallala Aquifer. There are no oil pipelines in the Sand Hills. And that is a fact. Secondly, the EPA said that both the draft environmental impact statement and the supplemental environmental impact statement are inadequate. Third, there have been 14 leaks on the brand new Keystone 1 pipeline including a 21,000- gallon leak. Some of the pumping stations, we've been told that all the leaks are in pumping stations. Some of the pumping stations are planned to be built in wetlands. Nebraska hydrologist John Gates and Wayne Wahl said that if it does leak, one, it's very likely to reach the aquifer; secondly, the aquifer discharges to the surface in many places so the leak is likely to go much further. In addition, TransCanada had a brand new pipeline explode in Wyoming just this summer. That was also supposed to be state-of-the-art. So we're supposed to trust that. And I believe as had been mentioned, TransCanada has violated Nebraska law by threatening eminent domain without authority. Then I want to end with a couple of quotes. There's a saying, "In the abundance of water, only a fool is thirsty." There's another saying from Abraham Lincoln, "You can fool some of the people, but you can't fool all the people all the time." Nebraska people haven't been fooled. We invite the State Department to join in our wisdom and deny this pipeline permit. Thank you.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker 72.  PAULA LARSON: I'm Paula Larson. I live in Niobrara, Nebraska. We just went through a lot of situations with water and we're still trying to clean that up. It seemed like maybe we ought to get Mubarak or somebody from Egypt to America, he's unemployed, to show us how to deal with water, with channeling and that sort of things. But other than that, I work with inventors and I worked for a long time. I do inventing, and the greatest part of working with like patent agents was to look over all the old patents when they come in. When an inventor comes in you have to compare his idea at the patent office with other ideas. To see the patents that were awarded to United States through the last, say, hundred years, it just made you feel like part of the country that the basis for America was ideas, and was ideas within America. Most of the inventors that came to us were from, you know, our area. Some of the ideas with the inventors we worked with, a fellow from Denmark invented the round swing. The patent agent I worked for invented the round hay bale. He worked on the ideas for the hay bale that's round. The turn signal, dump truck, portable phone, radial tire. We worked with the basic people that brought ideas to America and to the world. A lot of the ideas from America are used in the world. So the inventor and that part of being available is I believe more strategic for the common person to come up with an idea that can benefit a lot of people. I am thoroughly against corporations taking over and doing what I've heard they've been doing in the Sand Hills. I have a confession to make, and I hope I don't get shot going out the door, but my son works for TransCanada. And he's worked for TransCanada 26 years. He's a bigwig. He's a project manager. I won't mention his name, but when he started with Enron in Omaha he was 26. He's 50 now, he's still working. He's still working for TransCanada. He went to as far as Ottawa, Illinois. He went all over the country. When Enron failed he lost $500,000. He lost all of his savings with three kids. So the pipeline was tossed around and then it was sold to TransCanada. The pipeline TransCanada took over Enron's leaving. I don't know if everyone knows that. But in Canada, itself -- I work with radionics. I do inventing and I'm doing inventing and working with radionics, which is a science that is not well-known in America. It's actually hidden. The science of energy. And I know you're asking me to leave. I want you to hear an e-mail I got from a friend that works with radionics, a scientist in Canada; in Canada, about the environmental issues in Atkinson. "The Americans, they should be against it." She is from Canada. "They should be against it, and I'm glad something is finally being said. There has been massive evidence of problems in Canada, and it is being hushed up. "The Prime Minister is from Alberta, the province with the oil sands, and he is willing to do anything. He has been really terrible for this country. For him, everything is for sale no matter what. No environmental consciousness at all. Keep up the fight, we haven't been successful here. And now everything rests on the protests in America."  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker number 73. Seventy-four.  RON BOUSKA: My name is Ron Bouska. I live in the Sand Hills south of Stuart. In 2004 I had a new well put down on my land, which is approximately one and a half miles northeast of the proposed pumping station south of Stuart. I gave permission to the U.S. Department of Interior, U.S. Geological Survey, to test the water quality. They brought out to my place a semi trailer that held a complete lab, where they ran the water for two hours, then they ran purity tests for more than eight hours. I'm enclosing a copy. I'll give you a copy of their cover letter, the bulletin explaining the study, a copy of the national drinking water standards and the groundwater quality report of the tests that they ran. This shows that the water in this area is some of the most pure in the nation. This land has been in our family since my grandfather homesteaded it in 1883. For the past 128 years it has always been a priority to use good conservation practices, to protect the fragile sandy loam soil and the plentiful water under it. At the present time, if I want to spray a chemical down to the water's edge of my creek, I have to have a special permit from the EPA to do it. But it appears that TransCanada will be able to bury a pipeline carrying oil and poisonous chemicals such as benzene, a known carcinogen, directly in the groundwater without any state safety regulations or emergency plan in place. The static groundwater level at my place, as shown by the USGS report, is six foot seven inches. TransCanada says it will be using all necessary safeguards. Isn't that what BP said before the equipment malfunctioned that resulted in the disastrous oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico? If it is absolutely necessary for a pipeline to cross our state, in order to protect all users of this irreplaceable natural resource, let it be placed next to the one already in existence where the heavy clay soils could contain a spill without contaminating the water in a large subsoil area. Thank you.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker number 75.  WILLIAM COLLINS: Thank you. My name is William Collins, I'm the son of a district land man who has worked for 50 years for Natural Gas Pipeline of America located north of Beatrice, Nebraska. It is in our national interest and I support this Keystone XL pipeline. We currently export 20 percent -- import 20 percent of our oil from Canada, a much more stable source, and it is in the defense of this country much better than importing it from an OPEC nation. The renewable energy sector is not ready to take over for fossil fuels. Solyndra has proven that solar panels bankrupt them. And there's a company in Beatrice known as Dempster's that is being sued by its employees, that makes windmill turbines - - they're being sued by their employees because they're going broke. According to the Lincoln Journal Star, August 19, 2011, the Keystone XL pipeline will generate 468 million dollars in business activity, 161 million in tax revenue to the state of Nebraska, 5.5 million in the first year. The current Keystone pipeline that goes through Nebraska was just valued at 145 million dollars. In Butler County the valuation of the pipeline and the pump station is 19 million. Assessor Vicki Donahue says the tax on that will be a shot in the arm to their economy. The Dorchester School District superintendent, Mitch Kubicek, says that their share of the Saline County's tax revenues could lower property taxes for homeowners and businesses. I'd like to address some of the concerns that I've heard both in Lincoln on Tuesday and here tonight. We all have heard about it's going to contaminate the water in the Ogallala Aquifer. I have a map here. The aquifer is not just some little water hole there. It extends from Wyoming to near the Iowa border. If you plan on moving this pipeline, you're going to have to move this pipeline, the blue line here, near the Iowa border. That's just going to be flat out too expensive and TransCanada is just not going to do it. Also all these red lines that you see here -- these red lines are all the other pipelines that are currently crossing the Ogallala Aquifer. So I'm supposed to believe that one little pipeline up here is going to be as dangerous as all the red lines you see down here combined? Sure. This concept that landowners are being bullied. As I mentioned before, my dad worked for a pipeline company. He was a district land man, his job was to acquire right-of-way for pipeline. They pay a fair price of the value. The only time that they ever do an eminent domain is when the property owner's just asking way too much money for it. Then it's to their value to go ahead and do the right of eminent domain. Also, I've been hearing tonight how it's going to scar the land and everything. Pipeline companies, when they put a pipeline through, granted it looks lousy when they're putting it in, but they put the land back to its original condition. You're not even going to know what the pipeline --  WILLIAM COLLINS: There are 21,000 miles of pipeline in the state of Nebraska. Show me one where you could even know where it is. Thank you  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker number 76. Speaker number 76. Speaker number 77. Seventy- eight?  KURT ELDER: Thank you. My name is Kurt Elder and I'm a fourth generation Nebraskan. I was born and raised in Chase County. A little bit of my background is I have my education in ag production, ag business, computer systems, community and regional planning, business administration. Anyway, as I prepared to write today's comments, a memory that I hold dear surfaced, and I thought I brought clarity, that being on my fifth birthday my father, a union welder mind you, handed me a plaque that his father handed to him, and it said "Elder." "It was clean the day I took it, make sure it's clean the day you pass it on to your son." He's an honorable man. Along with him, my family, friends and community, I think they raised me pretty well. Of the lessons that I hold onto, the ones I find the most dear and valuable was that the smallest deed, doing the pipeline now, is better than the greatest of intentions, the promise of limited spills and total mitigation and remediation. Even if every inch of weld was x-rayed and if every wall test was tested, I still don't have that complete faith in the system. So today I ask you to do the right thing, help us protect that resource that defines us, help us protect that safety which we have shepherded through the generations. Share a message that the salvation of the state is in the watch from the citizens, and we are compassionate citizens. We aren't against jobs, but we are for the protection of people, our livelihoods and our nation's aquifer. So in closing, somebody I hope to see the fifth, the sixth and God willing, the seventh Elder generation -- who knows if that's a good idea -- and I'll let you -- and I know that not only will I pass along cleaning but also hopefully a clean environment and a clean democratic process. Please deny this permit.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker 79.  ALLEN SCHREIBER: Good evening, my name is Allen Schreiber. I'm a fourth generation Nebraskan. I majored in geology at the University of Nebraska. I studied the Ogallala Aquifer and Sand Hills extensively. I want to start off by saying that any work that was done by the company Entrix, you've got to understand one thing, they are paid by the petroleum companies to give the petroleum companies the results they want. For the State Department to use the same company the petroleum company has used to write their environmental impact statement is dishonest, it calls into question of the integrity of the State Department. It also calls into question the relationship of the State Department and TransCanada. Thank you for the federal Freedom of Information Act we now know exactly what that relationship is between the State Department and TransCanada when a former State Department employee now works as a paid lobbyist for TransCanada; when we now have access to the e-mail exchange back and forth between the State Department and that paid employee of TransCanada coaching TransCanada on exactly how to write their environmental impact statement so it will be approved. That is corruption, plain and simple. That ruins the entire American system that we so cherish and love here in the United States, and here in Nebraska. When you have Entrix presenting junk science and repeating over and over again the Ogallala Aquifer is just a layer of sands, gravels and clay stacked up on top of each other, that will not penetrate, bull. They had access to University of Nebraska's geology department's findings over the last 15 years what the actual structure is underneath the Sand Hills is a series of interlocking streams and river beds that were there 30,000 years ago, that were covered by those sand dunes. Once the water reaches the aquifer, it follows those underground streams just like their surface streams. The lie they hear over and over again, they move a foot a day, that's only 365 feet in the earth, bull. It moves miles. It moves miles in a year. Ask the residents of Grand Island, Nebraska. It's taken 31 years of cleanup on the old ammunition plant down there that was approximately four 55- gallon drums of carcinogen toxins. It's gone from the northwest side of Grand Island, under the city of Grand Island, to the southeast side of Grand Island. Private wells are not usable for drinking water or anything else right now because of that contamination plume. If this -- go ahead, give me a minute -- if this goes and leaks, and it will leak because they've already had 14 leaks in the one petroleum pipeline that exists in Nebraska, Mr. 22,000 miles of pipeline, only one of those pipelines is a petroleum pipeline. The rest carry natural gas, water or refined petroleum products. And while we're on the subject of petroleum products, this mystery of national security, we can't tell you what's in the tar sands oil, bull. Thank you very much for one person who works for Enbridge; who had the conscience of mind; who was cleaning up the mess in Michigan; who was sick and tired of watching his friends get sick that he's cleaned up with while they were wearing protective gear; who's exhibiting the same symptoms as the residents who lived over two miles away from that spill site, released a materials safety data sheet that was provided to the cleanup workers by Husky Oil of Canada as to what the contents of what they were cleaning up is. It is not crude oil, it is over half solvent, or almost half solvent. The majority which is benzene, which is on the EPA ban list, five parts per million is a maximum amount allowed in water. The rest of it is xylene and toluene, also known carcinogens. If you want to see what's in that materials data safety sheet, YouTube, check Bold Nebraska site, I posted up there twice. The guy sits there with his camera and flips it page by page so you can read not only what is in that tar sand crude, but also what the detrimental health effects are of exposure to the contents of that tar sand crude. It is poison, plain and simple -- oh, you want to cut me off after two minutes? Thank you very much for another --  ALLEN SCHREIBER: We are here to find the truth and the truth will come out. That is the whole purpose of these hearings, it's to listen to the truth. The truth is plain and simple. The person who wrote up the toxicology report is lying through her teeth. Why? Because she's paid by TransCanada to give TransCanada the results they need to get their permit passed. The geology that we keep listening to about how slow the water moves, how the thin layers - - that's based off of a report that was written by a professor in 1896. I think since then we've been able to find a lot more about what's going on underneath these sand dunes out here that are 300 feet thick. Like I said, ground-penetrating radar is a really wonderful thing. So is all the test bores that the University of Nebraska did. Why isn't that data in there? Because the data that we came up with from our great university, the University of Nebraska, was discounted by TransCanada's people as not being beneficial for their cause. Whatever happened to the truth? Whatever happened to the truth in Washington, D.C.? Whatever happened to our elected officials and our federal government standing up for the people of the United States; standing up for the citizens of Nebraska; standing up for each and every one of us individuals? If that permit is approved, and when that leaks into the Ogallala Aquifer, it's not going to spread very slowly. It's going to be a mainline injection into the jugular vein of our state. Think about this very carefully. We already have state laws in place that have well field protection zones around the wells of our communities. Why? Because we know how precious our well water is. Now we have an unregulated, unfettered crude oil pipeline full of benzene, toluene and xylene leaking directly into our aquifer. The Keystone 1 has already failed 14 times that we know of. That's what's been reported. That's way above the projected failure rate for the Keystone XL. XL does not stand for extra large, it stands for extra leaky. And interestingly enough, I contacted the Department of Homeland Security and I gave them a scenario. I said what if an individual or group of individuals knowingly and willingly create a device that will introduce toxins into a community's water supply, and thereby poison that community. What is that considered by Homeland Security? Is that an act of terrorism? The answer is yes, that is considered an act of terrorism. You are purposely poisoning a population. Think about that for a moment. Think about that for a moment. What are the repercussions? An act of terrorism, what are the penalties for terrorism? Are we going to go to Canada and arrest every single TransCanada official that approved this pipeline, that signed off on the engineering, and try them for terrorism? I know I would. I'd be the first one in line. We as Nebraskans have a golden opportunity --  ALLEN SCHREIBER: Thank you very much. We as Nebraskans have a golden opportunity. I'm a fourth generation Republican and I stand side by side, shoulder to shoulder with my friend Ben Gotschall, a young progressive. Why? Because there's things that are more important than petty party politics. There are things that are called what's right. What's right by the people; what is right for the citizens of the state. I'm fourth generation. My grandmother was born in Ashton, Nebraska, on the edge of the Sand Hills. My roots run deep. As a Boy Scout, I came up here and canoed the Cedar, the Loup; the Middle Loup, and then North Loup, the South Loup, the Niobrara, the Snake, the Wood River. Anything in Nebraska we could put a canoe in, our Scout troop put a canoe in. And guess what we discovered when we were canoeing in the Sand Hills? When you got stuck on a sandbar, you had to be very careful when you hopped out of the canoe for fear that you'd accidentally fall into a spring. When TransCanada's people tell you don't worry about it, the aquifer, you'll never see it, bull. The aquifer is at the surface all over the Sand Hills, and we all know it. Every time we cross that bridge on 281 over the Cedar River, where is that water in the Cedar River coming from? It's coming from a spring out of the Ogallala Aquifer. It's being fed by springs in the bed of that river. Why? Because that river is at the intersection point of the Ogallala Aquifer and the surface. Every single river in the Sand Hills is fed by the Ogallala Aquifer. The Platte River, it gains water on the north bank from the Ogallala Aquifer. It loses water on the south bank back into the Ogallala Aquifer. Because why? It intersects the water table. That same Platte River is also the water supply for the city of Lincoln where I live, and for part of Omaha. When there's a spill, and God forbid that spill occurs at the river crossing of Platte River, that plume of contamination will destroy the well field of Lincoln, Nebraska, which sits on an island near Ashton, Nebraska, in the middle of the Platte River. It will also destroy the well field for the city of Omaha. Is TransCanada willing to assume the cost of supplying drinking water to those two cities forever? No. Why are we not being able to hold our elected officials to task for not calling a special session? Why is our governor dragging his feet? Why are certain state senators dragging their feet? They say there's no bill in our legislature, bull. It was killed. Three different bills were submitted to the Natural Resource Committee to regulate the TransCanada pipeline, to assign liability for all cleanup costs. Do we want to wind up like the state of Michigan, which right now is in for over 650 million dollars in cleanup costs for the Enbridge spill? That is nearly this state's entire annual budget. One spill could easily go to a billion dollars if it's in the wrong place. Are we willing to take that risk as taxpayers in Nebraska because our governor drags his feet and will not do what he's supposed to do, what he's elected to do, which is to represent and protect the citizens of this state? Why was this killed in committee three times, three separate bills? Look at the votes. Look at the party lines. Look how it's split. Look at who financially backs those people who voted against it. It's Americans For Prosperity, and who is their financial backer? The Koch brothers. And what is their share in this? They intend to make tens of billions of dollars refining this oil in their refineries in Texas. They are the ones who are spearheading this whole thing. Start thinking when you sign your ballots and vote, people, and start putting pressure on people like Senator Smith, Senator Larson, and all the others up here in this area who are supposed to be representing you and your interests. Start putting the pressure on them. Start putting the pressure on them. Call that special session. Tell them flat out you don't do it, we're not voting for you next time. You're done. You want to destroy our livelihood, we'll destroy your political career.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Can you please wrap up your comments.  ALLEN SCHREIBER: My fellow citizens of Nebraska, thank you very much. Thank you very much for this chance to speak. It's time the truth comes out, people, it's time the truth comes out. The State Department evidently is in bed with TransCanada, because we have, thanks to the federal Freedom of Information Act, the e-mail records that prove it. They coached TransCanada on how to write their environmental impact statement. Who do they use to write the State Department's environmental impact statement? The same people that wrote for TransCanada. Gee, it's like taking Johnny's homework and putting your name on it, and handing it in. The State Department has at its disposal a truly independent source to look at this and write an environmental impact statement. It's called the United States Geological Survey, and it's called the Environmental Protection Agency. It is very interesting how all times when the State Department's EIS came up for review the EPA went thumbs down; it's not complete enough; it's not accurate, look at what's going on. They know better. And what happens? They're shoo-shooed and put off the site because it's not the answer the State Department wants. It's not the answer TransCanada wants. Think about that, people, tomorrow morning. Think about that tonight when you go home, and think about that the next time you step into a voting booth. Just because there's an R behind their name does not mean they're representing your best interest. I'm a fourth generation Republican and I ashamed of the Nebraska Republican Party right now for not standing up for Nebraska's citizens, and instead climbing in bed with TransCanada, who already has been caught giving them illegal campaign contributions. Think about that. Our governor and our Attorney General both were caught red-handed with illegal contributions from TransCanada in their coffers. Oh, they gave them back and returned them, but did that do anything? Did it change their mind? No, it did not. Thank you very much.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker 81. Speaker 82.  ANNIE ANDERSON: My name is Annie Anderson, and I am proud to say I was born and raised here in Atkinson, Nebraska. My dad and granddads have both operated cow-calf operations their entire life. My dad has been raising organic beef for 11 years. And my dad's business is built upon the principle of beef in its purest form. That is beef that is not only free from hormones and antibiotics, but also chemicals and toxins. I'm here today for many reasons, one being my passion for my dad's organic beef. But most of all, I'm here for my sons. You see, they are the future of America. The land is the future of America, and I would like to see my boys flourish and live on the land for years to come. Like many Nebraskans here today, I am here to defend what TransCanada is willing to jeopardize. TransCanada's solution for temporary jobs should not outweigh our entire state's ag industry and the livelihood of many Nebraskans. The pipeline safety is based on "shoulds," not certainty. We have already witnessed what their "should" philosophy is. The spills in the existing pipelines speak for themselves. This project is advertised as more jobs for Americans and a more convenient source of oil. Why then is the pipeline headed for the Gulf Coast, and how much of that oil is Americans going to get? What jobs -- what about our jobs as farmers and ranchers, they can't sell toxic crops or toxic livestock. Given Keystone's track record, it's very likely that we will have a spill or a constant leak. So how do you clean up an oil leak in the Sand Hills? How do you separate sand, oil and water? The answer is you can't. How do you clean contaminated water? It's not possible. Why should we risk contaminating our land and our water for our future farmers and ranchers, all for the sake of a temporary job solution and revenues? If God wanted underground oil in Nebraska, he would have put it here. But instead, He gave us an aquifer, Ogallala Aquifer. Let's respect what so graciously has been given to us. Let's take pride in our land and our water so future generations can continue to prosper from the land like it was intended for. I ask you as a mother, a Nebraskan and an American, please deny this pipeline route. Make your decision based upon long term concerns, not temporary solutions. I thank you and my sons will thank you.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker number 82. Eighty-four. Eighty-five. Eighty-four.  EUGENE RAMM: My name is Eugene Ramm and I reside in Atkinson, Nebraska. I would like to thank the U.S. Department of State for providing the opportunity for opponents and supporters to express their views and feelings regarding the proposed Keystone XL pipeline project. My testimony represents no organization or views of anyone other than myself. I oppose the Keystone pipeline. First, I understand the nature of pipelining and the desire of union workers for pipeline projects to provide income for themselves and their families. I, myself, at one time belonged to the International Laborers Union, and pipeline, laying 36-inch steel pipeline, natural gas in the mountains of Kentucky. Second, I value the friendship of our Canadian neighbors from the north, becoming well- acquainted with many of their customs and values during the time spent as an exchange student in the Province of Manitoba, near Winnipeg. Last, I am fully aware of the economic impact such a pipeline will provide, at least on a temporary basis, for the state of Nebraska and the other states the pipeline will run through. Yes, there will be some full-time positions created in certain regions based on the completion of the project. The Sand Hills of Nebraska are not only unique to Nebraska and this country, but they are also unique to the world. Nowhere in the world is there another formation of Sand Hills with the uniqueness of the available water source just underneath the sand, coupled with the source of water equal to the Ogallala Aquifer. Nowhere else in the world is there a formation of Sand Hills with the diversity of vegetation growing from the sand. The Sand Hills of Nebraska are truly a national treasure that must be protected fully and completely. I and any reasonable person that fully understands what the Sand Hills are, and the water and other resources provided, must question and oppose a project such as the Keystone pipeline. If there could be the 100 percent guarantee that a major or several minor leaks would pose no significant threats or risk, then I could be a supporter of the project. That is not possible, as even the most adamant supporters and those completing the studies and models have to admit there is no 100 percent guarantee. Likewise, there has never been an actual case history involving a region exactly as the Nebraska Sand Hills. When models fail and studies are found in error, it is always due to something misunderstood or a fault with some component of the model therein. TransCanada vice president Robert Jones cannot guarantee, nor anyone else, that there will be no impact to the water. The Keystone pipeline must be rerouted to insure the maintaining and preservation of the Nebraska Sand Hills and the Ogallala Aquifer. Thank you.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker number 86. Speaker number 87. Speaker number 85.  AMY JONES: I live on a ranch 18 miles southwest of Atkinson, and my name is Amy Jones. I lost my husband four years ago, but I stayed on the ranch by myself. I'm operating it and renting it. The Keystone pipeline is coming through one of my best hay meadows that I have cattywampus across the whole quarter. And the water level is about a foot under there, so the line, the pipe will lay in water. Now I have a grandson that's a chemist, and he said with all the heat that that gives off, the pipeline will give off, that the grass will not grow good. So I don't feel we need that either. And I also have never given them any money. I had the gal at my door time and time and time again demanding money, and I asked her what would happen to me if I didn't sign. Well, she said they can take you to court. And I didn't believe her hardly, but I never did sign. And I want my ranch for my grandchildren and great-grandchildren. So I hope that it can be there and be as good a shape as what my husband left it. So therefore, I hope that they get the group together, the governor gets the group together, and will get together and get it going. Not be waiting around until it's too late, so that we can have it go in another direction where the soil is clay instead of sand. Thank you.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Eighty-six. Eighty-seven.  TANNEN DVORAK: I apologize, I'm actually going to begin with something that is not my comment. But earlier, speaker number 30; and I apologize, I did not catch his name, said something that was offensive to me and I think misleading to you when he suggested that rural America is dying and unattractive to young entrepreneurs. I'm very honored to say that I graduated on that stage with 56 very classy people. Many of us left, got educations and worldly experience, and now half of us are back in the Greater Atkinson community raising families and starting businesses.  TANNEN DVORAK: And I believe that I can speak on behalf of Atkinson when I say that we don't need anyone's help. We just need what we have. Now my comment. I'm Tannen Dvorak, a fifth generation rancher on a 131-year-old ranch in the Sand Hills, and a small business owner with my wife here in Atkinson. In the small slivers of time that I have between ranching, running a small business and raising a family, my passion is economics. It was my study and it's what I love. When I examine U.S. History, I can identify many things that led to our greatness and our international relevance. When I make a similar examination of America in the present day, it's my belief that what maintains our relevance in the present and in the future is our food security. I also identified that as part of modern food production, energy is very important. That's one of many reasons why I'm not anti-oil, I'm not antipipeline. To be honest, I'm really not even a not-in-my-backyard-type of guy. What I am is a not-in-our-nation's- Breadbasket-type of guy. That's what this particular niche of the Ogallala Aquifer is. It's what it identifies. That's why I encourage and ask you to please, State Department, deny permission for Keystone XL to come into the United States until further examination is done and a route that goes through a less susceptible portion of the Ogallala Aquifer is presented to you. Thank you.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker number 88. Eighty-nine.  JAMES LIERMANN: My name is James Ira Liermann, West Holt High class of '86, and a Holt County rancher. For years I lived in Oregon and Louisiana. I've traveled through much of the United States, and several times through Canada. I studied biology, soil science, ecology and related subjects in college. I've worked as a landscaper, tree service worker, longshoreman, electrician, research assistant, as well as other things. So I think I have a pretty broad perspective. I'm now a third generation rancher at our family ranch, but my grandfather's grandfather worked the land at a different homestead in Holt County. So I have deep roots and strong ties to this land, the Sand Hills. I do not think the pipeline is in our best state and national interest. I wish the refined fuel, the end product of the Houston refinery, where this tar is supposed to go, would be slated for domestic use, but I hear it's intended for export, or to be put on the international market. If they're going to sell it to the countries besides the U.S., then just have them build a refinery in Canada and truck or pipe it to Montreal or Vancouver, or some other Canadian port city, and they can go from there. Since the fuel is to be put on the international market, I oppose the pipeline, period. In the very least the pipeline should in no way be allowed to cross the Ogallala Aquifer. If you look at a map of the aquifer, it's huge and part of eight states. But the thickest part of the aquifer, the part with the most water, is in the Sand Hills. There's no way a pipeline in any remote way of leaking toxic chemicals should be allowed to be built in the Sand Hills. For that reason alone. Not to mention the danger of nearly inevitable soil erosion of disturbed soil and subsequent loss of productivity from the land. And about the job issue. Nebraska has one of the lowest unemployment rates in the nation. I, myself, as a rancher, have more work than I can possibly do myself. I'd like to be able to hire somebody to help me, but I can't afford it. The point is we don't need TransCanada's jobs, which are going to be temporary anyway. If this is really about jobs, then route the pipeline a couple of hundred miles to the east over and through clay soil, away from the Sand Hills and our aquifer. That would create extra work, and I'm sure the company could afford it. We need our aquifer. We're not like Oregon here, we don't have watersheds of clear mountain water that we could use to fill our reservoirs. We don't have the mile-wide Mississippi River that runs in our backyard 365 days a year that we could purify and use for drinking water. Not that we would want to because it's a dirty river. But what we do have is the clean Ogallala Aquifer, a reservoir that God put there for us to use responsibly. Having a pipeline that has even a remote chance of leaking is not responsible. Without our aquifer, this area would be the Great American Desert. Please deny this permit and give us enough time to call a special session, and get the regulations in place to protect our land and water. Thank you for your time.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker number 90. Ninety-one. Ninety-two.  JIM LIEWER: Thank you for giving me time to speak here. I'm Jim Liewer, I come from Boyd County. We love our land, we want to protect it. I want to give these people a little encouragement here. We have a nuke dump right beside my house almost. Fellows, it took us 19 years. We defeated it. We put Ben Nelson where he helped us out. You can too. Don't give up. One little thing. I live right along the Niobrara, something that's never come up. The least tern and the piping plover are there right below my house. About a mile from my house runs the Niobrara River. I see them every summer.  AUDIENCE MEMBER: We can't hear you.  JIM LIEWER: I see them every summer. They're still there, I'm sure of that. I had to change my whole thing when I listened to all this water. I'd sure love to have a lot of it. It's plentiful over there in Boyd County. And a final note, please don't give up. Thank you.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker number 93. Ninety-four. Ninety-five.  MATTHEW CRONIN: Hello, my name is Matthew Cronin. I was born and raised in Nebraska and I'm a fourth generation Nebraskan. Everything's been said. I just want to reiterate the true national security issue is our fresh water supply. Oil bound for the globalized open market is not in our national interest. Protecting the largest aquifer in a state that is historically challenged by drought is a conservative act of self-preservation. Those willing to compromise it, those are the extremists. We can't risk it, it's not worth it. Please reject this pipeline.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker number 96. Ninety-seven.  VAL NELSON: Good evening. Thank you so much for coming to Nebraska and for hearing our viewpoints on this. You've been getting quite the gamut of opinions from both sides, and it's been running the entire spectrum, that's for sure. So I definitely don't want to just bore you by repeating things that have already been said. But I will say this much. Regardless of what side we're on in this issue, we do share common concerns. We all want clean water. We all love the aquifer. We don't want it contaminated by anything, especially oil; right? Right?  AUDIENCE MEMBERS: Right.  VAL NELSON: Thank you. And that's why it's so important to have this hearing, because there's been some information that just quite frankly isn't correct. TransCanada is putting this pipeline through with 57 regulations mandated by the EPA and other agencies like no other pipeline has before. Using three-quarter-inch steel, strong, high tensile reinforced steel encased in a jacket of concrete. And this is a thick jacket. There's virtually no way that this pipeline's going to leak unless some terrorist decides to dig down there and try to blow it up with a nuclear bomb or something, and that's not going to happen. Let's be realistic about this. It's been said that this is a recharge point where the pipelines are going to be going through. Well, that means that the water's flowing down which means contaminate can't go west, you know, it would be going east if anywhere. But that's not going to happen either because there will be no contamination. All the people who have testified against the pipeline would have you think that TransCanada's intent is to bring this pipeline down from Canada, stop it in the Sand Hills and just start pouring oil into the aquifer. That's not the case at all. In fact, the reality is that TransCanada's not a Canadian company as you've been led to believe here. TransCanada is an American company that actually has an office right here in Omaha, Nebraska, that employs 45 people. Half the TransCanada employees are here in the United States with the other half being in Canada. Yet they didn't tell you that part. The reality is this is something that is indeed in our national interest because it is the money that has been going over to these Middle Eastern countries that has put us in jeopardy. We have a flag up here right now as a testimony to what happened on 9/11. That should not have happened if we'd been dependent and been drilling here like we should have been all along taking advantage of our own national resources, and not being so dependent upon foreign oil. It is imperative to this nation's national security that we start exploiting our own resources instead of looking abroad to fulfill what we can do, ourselves. Yes, we want clean water. The TransCanada pipeline is not a threat to the Ogallala Aquifer. Thank you very much.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker number 98.  SUSAN DUNAVAN: My name is Susan Dunavan. I'm a landowner in York County, Nebraska. I have native pasture that is in the path of the proposed Keystone XL pipeline. The Department of State hearings have been a real education for me. I was told that these meetings were being held so that Nebraska voices could be heard regarding the question is the Keystone XL pipeline in the national interest of the United States. I did not realize that the voices of Nebraskans would be replaced by people who are paid to attend, people paid to testify, and people bused into the state from all over the country. I understand their desire for jobs. I want that for them, too. But I think the voices of our state is what needs to be heard. I am dismayed that people who are paid by TransCanada are able to receive preferential treatment at these hearings. I'm dismayed that these Department of State meetings are being run by Cardno Entrix, the professional environmental consulting company, which is a contractor for the pipeline company, itself. I am here not because I was paid. I'm not speaking because I was paid. I was not bused in, and I do not have my expenses paid. I am here because I am concerned about our water supply, the contamination of the aquifer, and the proposed route of the pipeline. I am deeply disturbed that a foreign company can come into our country, into the state of Nebraska and threaten me not just once, but twice with eminent domain condemnation before any permits are issued.  SUSAN DUNAVAN: Five different land agents have approached us over the past two years to sign easements. We have sent five certified letters to TransCanada, including two to Robert Jones, vice president of TransCanada, that remain unanswered. Each easement that was offered to us raised more questions. We would write another certified letter, and it would still not be answered. I do not understand how our friendly neighbor can spend hundreds of thousands of dollars on advertising and newspapers, magazines and television, and does not have the courtesy or the money to answer a landowner's letter. So the question remains is the Keystone XL pipeline in the national interest of the United States. I think all the people testifying today, at least those in red, all agree that please deny the permit to the pipeline. Thank you.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker 99. One hundred. One-o-one. Speaker 100, you can proceed.  JOHN SCHULTE: My name is John Schulte and I'm from Boyd County. I guess 21 years ago I documented the earthquake testing in Boyd County under the low level nuclear active waste deal, and what I did is I put it in the local paper. Plan C, the pipeline by BP is just another attack on the Ogallala Aquifer. And I would have to say that 99 percent of the people here today do not know that there's three arches in Nebraska in the Ogallala Aquifer. And these arches are court structures. One is the Cambridge Arch, which goes into Colorado south of Denver. The Chadron Arch, which goes into the Black Hills, and the Suanna Arch, which goes up into the Great Lakes. What we are talking about here is the energy and the movement of it to transmutation. Each one of these arches have had an instrument put on it, in the middle of the Kennedy Basin, and the deepest part of the Ogallala Aquifer at Thedford has a Doppler weather system. These three arches are a major weather maker in nature. Under Plan A, the nuclear waste dump, a thousand gallons of nuclear waste a day would have been put into the Suanna Arch. Under Plan B, by the good old boy from Atkinson, the wind farm north of Stuart, they would have had a ring of electrical energy underground on the Suanna Arch. Under Plan C, the Keystone pipeline, if a leak would occur, it would be a permanently polluted site, which would take years to go away. The pipeline will negatate [sic] the power of these three arches because all the power put into it through the heating and pumping of it. The objective here is to get on the Arch and to compromise the Keya Paha, Niobrara, Elkhorn, Loup and the Cedar Rivers in Nebraska. These are the bleed-off or the gravitational field of the Ogallala Aquifer. This is why this international project under the High Frequency Active Aerial Research Project doesn't want to change the route of this pipeline. It wants to control this gravitational field and to manipulate it to its planned project an ionospheric heater under HAARP, just like Plan A and B. Under Plan A, KAOR & Associates contracted for black-funded money and the Butte mafia on the local level were the contractors for the failed nuke dump to deliver Nebraska into Plan A, which resulted in an 146 million dollar payback on the bribe money. This was an attack on our First Amendment rights. The Strategic Armed Forces Services subcommittee, that Ben Nelson is a senator on, was the architect of Plan A. See "Nuclear Nebraska" by Susan Craig in 245. American Ecology, the parent company of U.S. Ecology went up in front of this committee to get the low level radioactive act repealed. This is where the black-funded money came from. The money on this pipeline is coming from the President signed an Executive Order. It's an International Monetary Fund deal. This bribe money carries no IRS obligations or criminal wrongdoings. The main contractors in Boyd County got ten to 20 million dollars of it, and I think John Gruhn even got some of it through his banking ties. Under Plan B they didn't have the backing lined up and Plan B would have not polluted the Ogallala Aquifer because it could have been dismantled. But Plan A would have. Nebraska dropped the ball on wind energy because under the law enacted in 1970, which Nebraska says it owns all the water in the state, it should own the energy that these wind farms are getting out of the atmosphere under HAARP. Under Plan C, it is eminent domain rights of the State enacted by international -- attacked by international interests. The state of South Dakota and Kansas have capitulated and South Dakota got 500 million from the Keystone. If Nebraska doesn't assert its eminent domain rights, it will also compromise its water rights, and the lobbyists are having a heyday. In the last hearing in Butte, in 1999 they stated that they were going to dewater the nuke dump site. They dewatered the whole Missouri River system. Look at it today. It's flooding. At that time, every river in Texas was running bank full. Today it is the opposite under HAARP. Rosebud Electric in South Dakota maintains a weather control system for HAARP. The drought that is coming here will -- and it started already -- will last until this pipeline is over with. It's not going to go away. It'll be Texas-style drought. And under Plan A, for every ten million spent there was a billion dollars worth of damage. Here where every one job is created there will be ten lost through the drought system.  
MS. HOBGOOD: If you can wrap up your comments.  JOHN SCHULTE: One line left. Either we, the people, address the money or it will undress us. It is Americans For Prosperity like People For Progress with richer cost protection.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker 101.  WILLIAM PLOCK: Thank you. Thank you, people, for coming up here. We really appreciate that. This is a fine school for this hearing too. I live by York in the town of Fairmont. My grandfather bought the farms in 1929 with the Depression, so my great-grandparents came here, so we're about fourth or fifth generation of farmers in that area. We've had two pipelines from Kansas -- from Geneva, Nebraska, all the way to Yankton, South Dakota. They built two pipelines when I was a kid. So those two pipelines have been there for 50 years with 50-year-old technology. We've yet to have a leak. We've had a leak at the terminals where they've had loading trucks and stuff. So to me 50- year, with new technology they should be able to monitor these new pipelines. We do need fuel for our national defense and for our farming, since we haven't got any solar tractors yet, wind-powered tractors. I'm waiting for the Sierra Club to invent those yet. But I would like to see this XL pipeline moved to the east where the original pipeline went so they get away from the sand to heavier soils from contaminating the Ogallala Aquifer. Because we irrigate out of that water also, and drink out of it. We have good water there too, and I hate to see it ruined. To get into those heavier soils. We got clay down 300 foot, then that's going to seal up water from going any further down. So thank you for your time.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker number 102.  JEAN LEWIS: My name is Jean Lewis. I was born and raised in Nebraska, and I've lived here most of my life. Living in other places only made me appreciate Nebraska all the more. I've been photographing Nebraska for 30 years. The Sand Hills are the most spectacular landscapes I've ever seen. I'll be brief. This is the way I see it. Corporations are legal entities designed to protect owners and managers from personal liability for their financial or criminal actions. Businesses incorporate to protect the personal assets of the owners. Corporations like Keystone are not like human beings who are usually fair and kind to each other. Corporations are only interested in profit for their owners. They do not follow the Golden Rule. The real people inside corporations lose track of honesty in their quest for profits. They use lies to convince skeptical people. Keystone has spent a lot of money to convince us that the pipeline is safe and necessary for our national economy. That it is patriotic to get oil from our friend Canada. But they do not tell us that the tar sands are destined to on the world market, and probably will provide oil for Asia. Keystone originally wanted a pipeline to go west through Canada to the Pacific Ocean in order to ship oil easily to Canada [sic]. But the First Nations in Canada stopped them so they had to reroute through the United States to the Gulf of Mexico and then to Asia by sea. If the oil were actually destined for the United States, the pipeline would not need to go all the way south. There are refineries in 34 states, surely a more central location could be found if the oil were actually meant for us. Why should we in Nebraska take all of the risks for none of the benefits, while a powerful corporation makes even more obscene profits? Please deny the permit to build the pipeline through Nebraska.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker number 103.  MARY ELLEN MULCAHY: I'm Mary Ellen Mulcahy, Greeley, Nebraska. I would like to request two considerations. A, ask for a delay from the federal government to agencies to allow a special session, or for the Nebraska Legislature 2012 to initiate siting regulations, and establishment of a specific committee to put a process in place for regulation of bituminous crude oil pipeline. B. Ask the President of the United States and the Department of State to deny permission to a foreign country to place a bituminous crude oil pipeline on my pasture ground of Valentine soil. After receiving two eminent domain letters from TransCanada, I asked my attorney to prepare a response. The second response from me requested a site change of one mile at an angle under Highway 281, to meet and cross into the Nebraska State Education land south of my pasture. My thinking was that the state highway and the Nebraska State Education lands would be better served to receive assistance from TransCanada. The request was denied. The second measure I undertook was to hire a private company to determine the quality of my grasses and forbs. To that end, identified were 50 species of plants, which will reside in the Bessey Herbarium on the UNL campus from Greeley County. The species had never been identified before as coming from Greeley County. The investigator I quote: "This native prairie is one of the best inventoried in terms of floristic quality of species that are less common and less likely to tolerate disturbances. They are worthy of conservation and have high seed value." I had three or four years ago contacted the SCS office for a review of my pasture prior to the pipeline consideration, and received a very positive report regarding the proper management of the pasture. The pasture has been in my family name since 1950 with my family being in Greeley County since 1901. There is no Nebraska agency for me to visit with, and federal agencies have issued veiled comments that are not to touch issues regarding the XL pipeline. There appears to be no respect for individual landowners who have managed the lands for many years. We are to be directed by the federal government and a Nebraska political system which is indecisive on taking action to help agricultural landowners who pay for the taxes to the counties and to the states. So I thank you very much for giving me this time to listen to me.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker 104. One-o-five.  LINDA DUCKWORTH: Hello and welcome. I'm Linda Duckworth, president of the League of Women Voters of Nebraska, and I live in Omaha. I'm glad I'm able to be here adding my voice to the many in opposing the current proposal. I'm inspired by the variety of comments today, and I thank all who spoke. At this time I want to concentrate on one word, influence. We all know that money buys influence with elected officials, and a lot of money can buy a lot of influence. But constituents have influence too. You notice that our governor changed his tune recently calling on the President and the Secretary of State to deny the permits. His tune didn't change because of money, but because he's been hearing from Nebraskans, lots of it. So I ask Nebraskans to do four things. Number one, contact Governor Heineman by e-mail, call or send a letter to say we need a special session to pass siting legislation. Number two, contact your state senator to say the same thing, special session. Number three, call the White House voicemail and ask the President to deny the permit. The number is 202-456-1111. And number four, ask your friends and relatives in other states to call the President and to contact their members of Congress to also call on the President and the Secretary of State to deny the permit for this current proposal. We need everybody all over to pull for us. That White House voicemail number again is 202-456-1111. Thank you.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker 107. One-o-seven.  MARCEL SUDBECK: My name is Marcel Sudbeck, I'm from Hartington, Nebraska. The first pipeline was built just a few miles west of our town. And at that time, TransCanada had a partnership with Conoco Phillips to build this. However, on August 12, 2009, TransCanada received approval to purchase Conoco Phillips' interest in the project and is now sole owner of the Keystone pipeline system. Therefore, TransCanada is a privately owned foreign company. Now I'd like to address another issue and that's of eminent domain. In 1998 a drug company, Pfizer, built a new plant in New London, Connecticut. To take advantage of new business that the plant might bring in, the City of New London attempted to purchase 115 homes in a nearby area. Fifteen residents resisted so the City used eminent domain and claimed the land. This went to court and in a very controversial decision, five-four, the City of New London prevailed. A group of people who were litigants in this then attempted to lay claim to one of the judge's homes. This led to President Bush to issue an Executive Order 13406, which states in part that "eminent domain may not be used for advancing the economic interest of private parties to be given ownership or use of property taken. "Eminent domain can only be used to obtain property for public use, or to advance the economic benefit of the State." We know that this pipeline will not be used for public use, so what are the economic benefits to the State? In 2008, when the first pipeline was being built, gas was 2.09 a gallon. After this pipeline was put into operation, U.S. exports of oil rose to 1.8 million barrels a day. Gas prices in the U.S. rose to 3.79 a gallon. In 2010 Nebraska consumed over 203 million gallons of gas. So this increase in the gas price, just an increase of gas cost Nebraskans over 345 million dollars more. An interesting note is that Canada currently imports 58 percent of its own oil needs. Back in 1994, Canada signed a NAFTA agreement with the United States, which prohibits Canada from refusing to export oil to the United States. If they cut their exports to the United States, they have to decrease their own personal consumption.  
MS. HOBGOOD: If you can wrap up your comments.  MARCEL SUDBECK: May I make one more closing comment. Back to the Kelo-New London court case, one hundred fifteen houses were destroyed to make way for new tax, increased developments. Twelve years later the judge ran into Suzette Kelo, who was involved in the lawsuit, and apologized to her. The 90 acres that was dozed over now sits as an empty lot. No development ever occurred. So I'm asking you to deny this permit for Keystone so you don't have to come back in ten years and apologize to Nebraskans for making the wrong decision. Thank you.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker 108.  RON LIEWER: My name is Ron Liewer. I live and work on a ranch here in North Central Nebraska, Keya Paha County. Can you hear me? This proposed pipeline borders my land. I have the world's purest and best water on my land. The Ogallala Aquifer is a national treasure. It is more important than a national park. There are many places in the world that do not have enough water. There are many places where the water is polluted. Most all pipelines sooner or later leak. I urge you to deny the permit for this pipeline. Thank you.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Speaker 109.  RALPH BODE: Ralph Bode, Liberty, Nebraska. I have grassland, and about half a mile of pipeline through my property. I understand the needs up here in the Sand Hills, and how you're concerned with what's happening to your aquifer. My ground is clay. Much of the ground can support a pipeline pretty firmly there, and would through Eastern Nebraska. That Eastern part of Nebraska, a route might be a possibility. Our nation was born on principles of individual freedom and liberty, free enterprise, limited government, strong national defense. Maybe we should take a hard look at cutting back on what the EPA can do to us out here, and maybe we should look for drilling for oil in America, in Anwar, in Nebraska, in South Dakota and the Balkan where there's plenty of oil. What's wrong with us around here? Are we going to take this kind of treatment of our land and of our property  RALPH BODE: We need to support the pipeline, but maybe an alternative route to the east would be the best choice. You folks up here in the Sand Hills are individualists, and that's what made this nation great. And the rest of us should take note, and maybe we should be looking at the Department of Education and look at how we need to cut back on them, too. I want to wake you folks up so you understand who you need to go see, and that's your representatives. We need to be clear on what we want for America in the future. And without being strong and individualistic, we can't have the group think that's going to destroy this country. Do you understand where I'm at?  AUDIENCE MEMBERS: Yes.  RALPH BODE: All right. So you see what happened in California with the San Joaquin Valley, they destroyed that. That was the EPA that took that little minnow and saved it from extinction. And with that 80,000 acres they took out of production, they took another 800,000 out, near 950,000 acres in total. I'll tell you how I know, because I contacted a man in Escondido, California, and he told me that it wasn't just 80,000 acres, because they cut down the water to those tree farms and those plants that they had in Southern California where they couldn't raise the plants, and they all died. All those people lost that production. That's not right. So keep in mind we need to take America back and it's going to be up to us because right now we're still a bottom up nation. Even though we're experiencing totalitarianism. So I can't tell you more than just wake up, folks, because it's up to us to make a difference. And remember, a course east through Gumbo sounds a little better to me than running it through the aquifer too. I rest my case.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Before I call on Speaker 110, I just want to make a couple of remarks because it's the bewitching hour, it's ten. I'm sure that some of you are wondering how long we're going to go. We want to hear from you. We're here to listen to your views. Many of you have been here for a long time and we want to get to you. One way you can help us is to try and be as succinct as possible. I know that that's difficult. You can submit your comments in writing. You can fax us. You can e-mail us. We will take your comments through October 9th. But I will ask you again to be as succinct as possible, because we would like to hear from all of you. Now we can take a five-minute break if I see a show of hands, and then after the five-minute break we can go as long as we can. I think before we end we're going to need a five-minute break. So we can do it now or we can do it a little bit later if you so desire. Let's go with speaker 110. Thank you. Speaker 110. Speaker 111.  MIKE FRIEND: Thank you. Ladies and gentlemen, my name is Mike Friend. I'm a former state senator from Northwest Omaha, and I'm now the Director of the Nebraska chapter of the Americans For Prosperity. Just a quick note. It seems like there's a pedigree discussion that's been going on all night. Fourth generation Nebraskan. I've lived in Grand Island, Carney, Nebraska City and Omaha. When my wife was pregnant with my first child I think she threw up in every trash can at the Conestoga Mall so I had to text her when we drove by today. She enjoyed that. I say that not to get a pat on the back. I say that because I'm not from Florida, I'm not from Connecticut. I'm a Nebraskan. And I care about this land. I'm a human being that cares what happens to this state. But I also look at facts. I look at economic data. I look at information that's available to me and I make the best decision that I possibly can. Two days ago I said that the safety issue, the energy security and the economic growth that this potential pipeline could provide were enough to sell me. And I still believe that. After the five hours I've spent in this great town, the hospitality that we've received, it's been great. But the bottom line is I can only operate on facts, statistics, information and not emotion. I will not operate on emotion. What I can say too, though, there are legal issues involved. I spent seven years in the Nebraska Legislature. I understand the legislature. Not as well as a guy like Ernie Chambers. Not as well as other people that have spent years and years and years in there, but I do know one thing. This is a federal issue, folks. If they have a special session, you mark my words it's going to cost us a lot of money and the federal government will come back and say wrong. We will dictate to you exactly how it'll happen. All I'm doing is telling you, mark my words. Now all that said, I appreciate the time that I've had up here. I appreciate the time that we've all received to speak and the hospitality when shown. I'll go back to what I said on Tuesday. I believe if you set the emotion aside to the best of your ability, and understand what's exactly trying to be accomplished from an economic standpoint, scientific standpoint and from a legal standpoint, I think maybe we can all come to the determination that this may be the best thing for the state. Thank you.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker number 112. One-thirteen.  DARLENE STARMAN: Thank you. My name is Darlene Starman. I live in Lincoln, Nebraska now, but I grew up on the edge of the Sand Hills about 45 miles from here. The State Department was responsible for providing us with a detailed environmental evaluation of the Keystone XL pipeline over the last three years. That included supplemental studies to explore concerns raised by the public. I am convinced that this pipeline will be built and subjected to the highest and strictest environmental standards. Thousands of miles of pipeline already crisscross our state, and have been operating without incident for many, many years. Of course we must be mindful of our state's water resources. But I appreciate and trust the many, many safeguards that have been put in place by TransCanada. In fact, it appears that they have gone well over, above and beyond to insure the safety of the aquifer. I ask that you move this project forward and grant the necessary permit to get this pipeline started. Thank you.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker 114. One-fifteen. One-sixteen. One-seventeen. One- eighteen. One-seventeen.  GLEN FLINT: Howdy. My name is Glen Flint, I'm from Springfield, Nebraska. I was born and raised in Alliance, Nebraska. I have aunts and uncles that ranch in the Sand Hills east of there. My in-laws ranch south of here. I enjoy touring the Sand Hills on many of the oil map roads that were installed by the county by spraying oil on the ground. And as far as I know, none of that got into the aquifer. So I think you're worried about nothing here. I'm going to read a letter that was sent to me by Bruce Desottles from Stratton, Nebraska. And I agree with his sentiments. He says, "All the reasons given to oppose the Keystone XL pipeline by such environmental crusaders as the Nebraska Sierra Club, are identical to those cited in the 1970s in opposition to the Alaskan pipeline. All these assertions proved untrue then, and they're just as much hyperbole now. "Petroleum has done the most to improve the American standard of living over the last century. Considering the technological advances made by the oil industry, there's no sound reason why petroleum should not be allowed to continue its promise of reliable energy and real economic opportunity for the United States in general and Nebraska in particular. "The Sierra Club states on it Web site, 'This proposed route through Nebraska is guaranteed to decimate and destroy a huge amount of fragile, rare habitat that is vulnerable.' Guaranteed. Their logic contends that because something might go wrong, therefore it will go wrong. "Since when do we base our societal decision and infrastructure on Murphy's Law? Safety is a paramount consideration in most any endeavor. But these individuals demand assurances that exceed the bounds of reason, and given a choice they would bring progress to a screeching halt in favor of imagined pristine wilderness that really never existed except in their imagination. "This nation has 170,000 miles of petroleum transmission pipelines which serve as primary means of moving crude oil, gasoline, diesel fuel, other petroleum products to consumer markets. "Pipelines are safe, efficient, operate 24 hours a day seven days a week. Their operators strive to protect these assets from corrosion, excavation damage and other threats. "They have dramatically improved pipeline safety and substantially reduced both the number and volume of spills. A comparison of three-year spill averages for the periods 1999 to 2001, 2007 to 2009, show a 59 percent decrease in the number of spills per thousand miles of pipeline; 41 percent decrease in the volume spilled per thousand miles of pipeline. "Operator error can lead to events that put stresses on pipelines that significantly exceed the designed parameters, but such events are very rare, generally do not reflect a vulnerability intrinsic to the asset, itself. "According to March 2011 summary, pipeline infrastructure management, managing performance is more important than age." And I quote here, "Industry and service providers have developed better diagnostic tools, techniques and materials over time. More importantly, the industry has not developed -- has not only developed ways to maintain the assets above acceptable levels, but has even improved the performance of older assets. "This improvement was made possible by the industry's multibillion dollar integrity management investment, underpinned by regulation since 2001. The integrity management rules were aimed at high consequence areas, high population areas, an area of unusually sensitive ecology, a drinking water supply or commercially navigable waterway. "Pipeline segments that are classified as ones that could affect a high consequence area, constitute about 44 percent of hazardous liquids mileage, subject to the regulations of the U.S. Department of Transportation's Pipeline and Hazardous Material Safety Administration. "However, operators inspect and repair more segment miles than the regulations require. A recent 2010 industry survey showed that respondents who operate 54 percent of the liquid pipeline miles subject to PHMSA regulation has inspected nearly 90 percent of the total pipeline mileage even though the required inspections would have covered only 56 percent."  
MS. HOBGOOD: If you could wrap it up, please.  GLEN FLINT: Okay. I'll just say move the XL Keystone pipeline because wasting time and resources to assure a hundred percent guarantee to those who demand perfection may satisfy the followers of Mr. Murphy, but it does nothing to employ American workers nor further the goal of an energy independent United States. And failing such efforts is definitely not in the best interest of Nebraskans.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker 118. One-nineteen. One-twenty.  PAUL KIMMONS: My name is Paul Kimmons. I'm an architect from Omaha. I'm for the pipeline. We have a family farm in Phelps County, it's got sandy loam soil, very sandy loam soil. We have a Trailblazer pipeline 30 years ago, not any problems. Above it we farm crops, beans, corn, wheat. We also have a wildlife preserve. We also have a grassland. You wouldn't even know it was there, it's been no problem. One of the most important things we have for the future in Nebraska is energy. That's our most important requirement. If we've got enough energy in Nebraska, we can do almost anything. And if we limit our energy, we're causing a problem. Actually it's critical for our future development. It's critical for job growth. And it's critical for national security. It's an unrealistic fear to be worried about a pipeline that's going to leak. Everything we have that we use in our life here in Nebraska has negative parts to it. Driving a car is dangerous, but it gets us where we want to go. We should look at a pipeline in the same way. It's something we can use. It has a few dangerous things about it, but we can control those. We can handle it. Actually our God-given assignment on this earth is to develop the resources for the betterment of mankind. And that's why I'm for the pipeline. Thank you.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker 121. One-twenty-two.  DOUGLAS LIEWER: Good evening, my name is Douglas Liewer. I'm a graduate of Chadron State College. I majored in business administration, marketing/entrepreneurship and ag business, and graduated in 2010. I'm opposed to the Keystone XL pipeline being built in the United States. Common sense and my Catholic faith tell me that God created the earth. God created human beings to watch over this earth. As human beings, we're to provide stewardship, conservation and protect our land, water, soil and air, and wildlife. When we came from Boyd County to Atkinson, Nebraska, we cross over the Niobrara River, which I enjoy canoeing, fishing and hunting wildlife. We are farmers in Boyd County, Nebraska, and we like to produce beef cattle, sheep, corn and soybeans, oats and peas. We provide the safest food in America, and we provide to the world. We also raise chickens that are not factory farmed, they run out and get all of our grasshoppers and bugs. And they are strong. My Uncle Ronnie and Jim Liewer, my dad, also spoke today. When I go out to Ronnie's ranch and drink his water, I don't have to worry about all the contaminants that this tar sands oil will bring to this area. I know I can drink it right out of the well. It's pure and it helps my health, and I don't have to worry about all the chlorine or bacteria that's in there because I know it is safe. I believe in American exceptionalism. I do not need a podium or teleprompter to speak to fellow Nebraskans. Someday I want to be governor of Nebraska, and being governor of Nebraska I will protect this land, protect our landowners, protect our wildlife, and urge Governor Heineman of Nebraska to call a special session and to pass Senator Ken Haar's bill that will be out on Monday. Thank you. And again my name is Douglas Liewer from Boyd County. Please deny the permit to TransCanada. Thank you.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker 123.  AMY JONES: Good evening. Thank you for coming to Nebraska. First of all, I'm against the XL pipeline. And I am a fourth generation Nebraskan. I grew up in the eastern part of Holt County, had never seen the Sand Hills until I married. I am now in love with the Sand Hills. There's nothing like them. You can drive out here and you can see the shimmering water in the meadows - - it's an awesome place to be. The one thing that I remember so well was about 30 years ago down at Bartlett, and I think I can say this, Peter Kewitt bought some land down there. And they tore it up to plant corn. Within six months, the wheels on the irrigation systems were covered up halfway with sand. That shows us that the Sand Hills do not repair themselves over one winter. Once they're dug up, that's the way they will be. And that's the way the line will be. It isn't going to grow back this year or next year. It's going to stay raw sand for quite a while. I am urging Governor Heineman to do the special session. We need that very badly. And the other thing, thanks to our indigenous friends and neighbors, Nebraska I think is the most beautiful state and the most beautiful name of a state in our United States. And it means the land of flat water.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker 124.  CHRIS REESE: Howdy. My name is Chris Reese, I'm a business representative for Operating Engineers Local 571 for the state of Nebraska. Our local represents roughly 550 individuals throughout the state of Nebraska. We have members in about every corner of this great state including the metro areas, the tri-city area, the panhandle and the Sand Hills. Our union supports the TransCanada Keystone 
XL. Each year our union holds numerous classes to educate our members on pipeline construction and maintenance. Our craftsmen are chosen for their quality. Our members, other Nebraskans and TransCanada do not want to see a pipeline that would leak. Our brothers and sisters do not want their backyards ruined. The citizens of Nebraska here in this room do not want to see their land damaged. And TransCanada does not want to see their products lost. Many things I have heard tonight have definitely made me think, and the people here are very passionate. I live just across the border in Iowa where we have the Loess Hills. It's not as delicate as the Sand Hills, yet it can be damaged and it is hard to grow products there. We do have a system that winds up protecting our Loess Hills. And I would hope that if you don't already have it set up here for the Sand Hills, hopefully that the state representatives will hear that and set up a similar system to our Loess Hills. And if the pipeline goes, I would encourage you to pressure your state representatives to use the tax money from that line to protect your Sand Hills and repair it when it is needed. Thank you for your time.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker 125. One-twenty-six. One-twenty-seven.  MARV FRITZ: Marv Fritz; O'Neill, Nebraska now, but I've lived my entire life probably 30 to 40 miles away from this pipeline, most of the time right on it, where their route will be. Everything else has been said 25 times, hit a little bit different angle maybe. From an economic standpoint, I looked around -- I was a freshman in high school, I walked into this building when this building was brand new. I was the first class in there. There was over -- there was about 300 kids in that building that year, and it comprised four years. I just talked to the superintendent earlier, before a couple of schools closed, some rural schools closed, you had 350 kids and 13 grades. So the economics is not working for everybody. But I'm also -- I've spent -- I've invested every dime I've ever made in my entire life into a facility in O'Neill, Nebraska that needs clean water more than anything on the planet. We grow tomatoes. So that's paramount. It has to be done right. But I also know from -- one of the reasons I put out that effort and I'm very passionate about it is that when I came back -- I lived in Wheeler County, which is still along the route down there, where my farm down there was just a couple of miles from the pipeline. We have the same deal down there. Lose kids, lose kids, we have no -- there's nothing left, nobody's coming back to the county irregardless -- I know some people are but not near enough are -- want to try to build something and it's going to take good water to do that. But we also can't -- I mean not everything that's said on both sides tonight can be true. There's too much -- there's too much opposite. I don't know, I'm not a scientist, but I do know that this is the third time in my life that I've showed up here. In 1981 we had a crowd about this size in Bartlett, Nebraska, because we were going to pump the aquifer dry. A few years later, when they found we didn't, the water was staying the same, then they come back at us and said you're going to run -- nitrates are going to destroy this country. Now 25 years later, the water's the same level it was when we started pumping in 1974. The background and nitrate levels are less than they were when we started pumping in 1974. So we got to sort the facts out from the hyperbole, but it doesn't make sense to me either than you got the thing -- I mean you're right on the edge of the aquifer -- you could move this thing 60 miles east and get away from 90 percent of your problems. You move highways for a dung beetle. It would seem like it wouldn't make that much effort to move a pipeline a few miles. I'm for the pipeline. I think we need the economic development. I just don't think we need it maybe over the best part of the aquifer.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Before I call on Speaker 128, if we can take just a five-minute break and I promise you it will be just five minutes. Thank you.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Speaker number 128.  TOM LIEWER: Hi. My name is Tom Liewer. I'm from Butte, Nebraska. I've live by the Niobrara River, and I've lived there all my life, for 34 years. I grew up in fear because of the threat of the nuclear waste dump that was for Boyd County, and this pipeline sounds like fear to me, too. Because when it leaks, it's going to leak into our water and could probably -- will probably kill a lot of our fish and birds and our cattle, and like that. I'm really blessed to be here, because I am a survivor of -- I survived from suicide, because of fears of just really bad things happening. I'm glad I made it here. And my dad and all the law enforcement have really helped me, and especially my counselor. So please stop the pipeline. You know, there is people that could lose their lives over this, because of fear and even cancer. Who knows what else they could get? Thank you.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker 129. One-thirty. One-thirty-one.  ALAN WINGE: Good evening, my name is Alan Winge. And I'm concerned that this pipeline is -- we can't risk the resources of the land and water in Nebraska for a temporary pipeline -- temporary jobs. These are things that produce for us a long time to come, and have been produced. I know we need the jobs. I know how it is working on these construction jobs that are temporary, and I've been laid off more this year than ever before. So I know it's painful to be out of work and to lose one's income and not knowing the next thing's coming along. I'm a supporter of labor, and I want people to have the good paying jobs they need. But I don't think this is worth the risk. Just talking to a fellow outside in the parking lot out here today, and a few people out there, they supported the pipeline. It really raised questions for me. When I'm hearing that there's so much oversight, people watching everything that's being done as it's being built. But then a guy who says he works for TransCanada said, but all of our leaks on the Keystone pipeline were from these valves and pump stations and whatnot, where it was a nonunion crew, and it's because of shoddy workmanship, whatnot. So I'm wondering where was that oversight then? Where were all those people watching then, because he's saying it cost them all this money to fix all this stuff from shoddy workmanship. So now I guess they're talking about all these safeguards and it can't leak. Well, I hope they're right, but I don't think it's worth taking a chance with these valuable resources, so I'm asking you to deny the permit.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. Speaker 133. One-thirty-four.  AUTUMN LEMMER: Hello. Thank you again for letting me speak in front of you and for being here in Nebraska, and allowing us to speak for you. I have a couple of comments and then a short story that I'm going to lead into for you guys. I guess most of it is led by the gentleman who spoke not too long ago before he left, and said that we were expecting perfection. That's kind of striving my comments right now. One thing I would like to say, the sea of red that you still see here and the people that are here from Nebraska are not what you guys in D.C. would normally think of when you think of activists. Most of these people in here have never sat on a rally line, held a picket sign, or even thought about speaking out. The one reason they're here is because this issue affects them more than any other job might possibly affect them. And I say that, I know we need jobs. I'm also a counsel coordinator for Move On, which is a national organization. The last year and a half I've been having rallies for union and labor workers on jobs. This is the first time I found myself on opposite sides of the fence. And I've had plenty of talks, and they're very -- for the most part they're very nice. But it's difficult for me when I know we all need jobs. But to me personally this was not a job fight I was willing to take on, and that's why I am on the side that I am. Now for the background of the activism. A couple of weeks, actually a month ago I was fortunate to meet a landowner from Texas, a wonderful woman who shares my mother's name of Eleanor, who was 77 years old. She has ridden a bus up to Nebraska on her way to D.C. to protest. And she was extremely excited that she was going to be arrested for her first time at 77 years old, fighting for her land and water. I, myself, was approached before I met her and was given that opportunity to go to D.C. and take a chance of being arrested, myself. I'd never been arrested before in my life, and I jumped at the chance. I knew that that would be something that I could tell my children and my grandchildren and be proud. Yes, grandma got arrested, but she did it fighting for Nebraska and Nebraska's land. So that woman, going to D.C. so empowered at what she was doing, and me knowing I was doing the same thing, so that when I am 77 I can pass down that same fight that we have for our land. That stretches all the way along from Canada down to Texas and all of the states, and especially here in Nebraska. Thank you.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. One-thirty-five. One-thirty-six. One-thirty-seven. One-thirty-eight.  JULIE BECKER OWENS: Thank you very much, ma'am and sir, for sticking with us this long. We appreciate it. I am not a landowner in Sand Hills. I live here. My husband and I -- I'm going to take a little different tack here if I may. My husband and I have been urged all of our lives. We have paid 30 percent of our earnings to the government always without question. He pays 30 percent, I pay 30 percent. We both work. We always, always have been that middle class that our government has come to depend on. We pay it without question. We pay it happily. We do it because it's our duty and we love to do it, and we're happy to do it. And we've never asked anything, anything from our government until now. We are united in asking -- excuse me, I didn't introduce myself. My name is Julie Becker Owens. We are united in asking that please hear us. We have given and given and given and given, and never asked a thing. And like I said, happy to do it. Please now save the Sand Hills and the aquifer. And there is one other point I'd like to make, and that is, I do think that we haven't talked enough about another issue here. And that is why are we even talking about a pipeline. We need to be talking about alternative sources of energy. You two are both too young to remember World War II, as am I. But as a history buff, I know that when we were challenged this nation was able to come up with some amazing, amazing things that brought us through, through a time of crisis and brought us through. I know, I know that if we stop our dependence on oil altogether, which rapes our land, that we could come up with solutions for better cars and better energy. And if you say no to this pipeline, you're sending a message back to Washington for us that says come on, we're Americans, let's think of better ways. So thank you. I am a strong supporter of our government, as is my husband, and please take this message to Madame Clinton and to my President, Barack Obama. Thank you very much.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. One-thirty- eight. One-thirty-nine. One-forty. One-forty-one. One-forty-two.  SUSAN WATSON: I don't want to spend too much time talking. I'm Susan, you saw me on Tuesday and I wanted to thank you again for coming here and taking this time. These people, all of us really appreciate it. We're here because as you heard, and I'm not going to go over all the facts; people have given you all the information. But you can see easily is the people here are concerned. They don't trust this company. They don't trust pipelines not to leak. Even the company, itself, says it's not going to leak. We know it's going to leak. But they trust the system and they trust that you are going to take this information, and you're going to see these people really care and they need to be protected from something they can't protect themselves from, a lot of them. Most of them don't have the money to go fight TransCanada themselves. The government needs to step in and do something here. I just want to say that maybe you could go back and let President Obama know that -- well, we know we're a conservative state, we know where our votes usually land. But maybe, maybe if you said you know what, this isn't a good idea. I don't want to risk the lives of any Americans. He has the right to deny this permit. He can say you know what, instead of getting this pipeline, let's get an American company that we can help out with some stimulus money, who can train some of these union workers, who I've always supported by the way, train them to tilt windmills. Get those put out there in the Sand Hills. Even if somebody was inconvenienced by having a windmill on their land, it's not the same as potentially having pipeline on your land that can contaminate their water. It's a complete different thing. Maybe, just maybe, the whole state will turn blue. At least once. There's an election coming up, I'm going to go for anything here. Maybe you could tell him, you know, we need his help. We need to be protected. I could yell and scream and jump up and down, which I'll do to get other people's attention. But I know you guys are listening and you're going to take this back. Thank you for taking the time and please, please make sure they deny this pipeline permit. Thank you.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. One-forty-four. One-forty-five. One-forty-six. One-forty-seven. One-forty-eight. One-forty-nine.  JAMES WETZEL: My name is James Wetzel, I'm from Atkinson, Nebraska. I would like to make a few points. We've had history here, the Nordin Dam, which spent years being litigated and conflicted. And it created some politicians' careers. Then we had the Central United States low level radioactive waste siting, which likewise probably created the careers of several politicians who would have been unpopular and never got anywhere without them. Here we come again; we've got this pipeline and for some unexplained reason it's something that should have been taken care of by the Nebraska Legislature. The State of Nebraska owns section lines all over the state that have been abandoned. All you have to do is pass a law and say "this is the section line you're going to use" and run it away from whatever this, and the State of Nebrasks would be in complete control. And for example, that's what happens anyway; in the Central U.S. low level radioactive waste commission, former Governor Ben Nelson ultimately decided just to breach the contract; cost the state $145 million-plus, and that appears where we're headed again. A lot of failures to negotiate. We did a few computations. If you carry all this oil by truck instead, 55 million gallons a day or a million barrels a day, it would take 11,000 trucks going south, crossing the border; and 11,000 trucks going north. 1,250 miles with the current fatality rates, you could expect a fatal collision at least once a day; and with our weather, the probability that we would block traffic by weather for a few days, why we'd probably exceed Interstate 405 in Los Angeles on occasion, which carries some 30,000 vehicles per hour, day and night, on 10 or 12 lanes going each way; and Nebraska roads simply aren't situated to do that. Again, people say that the groundwater in Nebraska is not contaminated. Several years ago I had an occasion to test water, and approximately 80 percent of the water including -- one of the highest ones was here in Atkinson, Nebraska, had both lead and arsenic detectable. Most people say if it's detectable, it's too much. O'Neil had a high concentration of arsenic in the water. These are all done through the Natural Resources District in O'Neil; you can find the results there. But lead and arsenic are part of the soil in this area; they're detectable and they are there. It doesn't do us any good to deny it, but they're there before. When you start talking about cancer in Nebraska, why you start looking at lead and arsenic, which is already there, prior to the pipeline. It's unfair to people to say 'this is the purest water in the world;' it isn't.  
MS. HOBGOOD: If you can wrap up your comments.  AMES WETZEL: Most people that follow this, Secretary of State Hillary Clinton know that she wrote her thesis in college on a book written by Saul Olinsky called "Rules for Radicals" and that basically the thesis was that people adopt a movement, stir it up, and get name recognition and then go on to politics. And that seems more than anything rational could be what's happening here. The pipeline is probably far safer than trucking. Lyme disease, I usually mention that. It's become an issue with me; my sis got Lyme disease; it's a national epidemic. It is primarily on the coast, but it's out here, too. And once again, the State of Nebraska is ignoring that. These are things that -- for example, probably 80 percent of the U.S. prison population has first been afflicted with Lyme, and then a tiny minority of those afflicted get violent and then they end up in prison. And it's extremely unfair. It's like this pipeline where the government simply refuses to acknowledge the existence of these major problems, which could easily be resolved by the governor, and should have been in the past, for previous problems.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you.  JAMES WETZEL: Thank you. Have a good day.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Speaker number 151. One- fifty-two.  BILL KOENIG: Hello. My name's Bill Koenig and I live down the road in Ewing. I would like to put my support for the pipeline. However, I would like to see it as a reroute. I do a little canoeing on a river, it's a spring-fed river from the Ogallala Aquifer called the Dismal River. And it has a spring there about as wide as your table, and if you try swimming in that you cannot sink because the static water pressure will push you out. And you'll hear that from ranchers in the springtime as the spring/fall comes they'll have what they call boils. And because the water pressure underneath water boils out. Even with a special cement-encased pipeline, it will eventually get pushed out. So that's my main concern about the environmental issue here. Whenever it comes down to us fighting Mother Nature, Mother Nature always wins. I think there's a better route further east where they do not have that static pressure, that would better serve the pipeline. Thank you.  
MS. HOBGOOD: Thank you. One-fifty-three. One-fifty-four. One-fifty-five. One-fifty-six. One-fifty-seven. One-fifty-eight.  CAMERON SCHMUCKER: Hello and thank you. My name is Cameron Schmucker. I'm 16 and I'm proud to be at this high school, West Holt in Holt County, Nebraska. And what I love is our nation. Home of the free, land of the brave. But one thing I love more than our nation is our Sand Hills. I love our Sand Hills. This is where I have been born and raised. I have hunted and fished all my life, and I will keep doing that till the day I die. And I have loved it. And my brother Jacob, he was the one that really started me in this, and my other brother and my dad. If he could be here today, he would be telling you the same thing. Save our Sand Hills. He died in Iraq unfortunately in an IED attack. But I know that if he was here, he would say the same words I am, help save the Sand Hills. The one thing I have not understood quite yet is how all the politics deal in this, and how crazy some things can be. Because yeah, all the people from Polk County pretty much here, but then you have other people that come in from other places. And the people from the other places, they try to get their word in before the people, who are local, can get their word in.  CAMERON SCHMUCKER: Which I can't stand because I think this is supposed to be local to the people who are in the Sand Hills, live this every day, and have to put up with if the pipeline leaks, all the oil that's going to come onto our land, get into our streams, our rivers, our ponds where we fish; pollute our animals that we hunt. And all the farmers, ranchers and everything else will be destroyed. I love this small town. I can go anywhere, everybody will wave and say hello. And I can't get that in a big city. If I have to leave this place, I'm going to be forced into living somewhere like living near Omaha where everybody just kind of glances at you and turns away. I love this town and I would love to stay in this town. And if I could stay in this town for the rest of my life oil-free, I would love to do that. I would love to say this right now. Reject this pipeline for our nation because all it's going to do is cause oil spills, even if it isn't in the Ogallala Aquifer. You're still going to have oil spills somewhere else, and it's going to ruin all the land. Somehow, in some form or way it will get in all of the rivers and streams. Just like like how the carp have invaded. It's crazy. When people really don't take into consideration how much this pipeline will really affect this nation. There were people saying there's no way it will leak. But if you look at the facts from other pipeline -- it says oh, well, this pipeline spilled maybe two gallons. Then you read another article on the same pipeline and it says it spilled 200 gallons. But really, it doesn't matter how much it spilled, it spilled. Now you're saying that ours isn't going to spill? I can look at most any pipeline in this whole nation, and it probably has at least one thing that has probably failed them. And this one, they've already talked about failures and it hasn't even reached Nebraska. I think that is sad and pathetic. Then all these people come in and say that it's going to create jobs for them so that they can feed their family. Well, you know what, if it gets into the water stream you're not going to have any food. So then what? Then you're talking about how they'll raise their kids. Well, then their kids are going to affected by all this. Then their kids are going to have leave. I think it's just crazy. I do not want this pipeline at all.  
MS. HOBGOOD: 159. 160. 161.  VOICE: 162?  J. ROCK JOHNSON: The sign-up sheet was gone before I was able to sign up. I can be reached through fieldsurvey@earthlink.net I drove hours to get here. It's now past my bedtime. But two weeks ago, I drove across Nebraska. In Nebraska, under our feet, is the sand and the plant root system that anchors it. Underneath the land is the water, our Nebraska ocean. The northern section of the Ogallala Aquifer. I am an Admiral in the Nebraska Navy, and I wanted to check out my ocean. On my way, my previous trip, I drove through our person-made forest here, Nebraska's Halsey Forest, to Alliance then Scott's Bluff. In a global economy, one can be hard- pressed to define national interest. Our Governor Heineman heads up currently the National Governors Association. Our lieutenant governor, Rick Sheehy, which is S h e e h y, heads up the National Lieutenant Governors Association. In Nebraska we are but one of 50 states. What is our national interest as seen through the eyes of Nebraskans? Every word we have spoken this evening has been recorded on a transcript by a court reporter who has been trained and dedicated his life to getting our words right. I would like to get a copy of that transcript. I understand you are here on a listening session, and you have agreed to hear every word that we say. And I would like to be able to read every word that we say. Is it permissible for me to ask you that question of how we can get that transcript? Let me ask you a question you can answer. I did ask for your business cards, and you're out. So that would be Stewart M -- and the next letter before the @state.gov? You know your email address, now, come on.  
MS. HOBGOOD: My name is Teresa Hobgood; that's t e r e s a h o b g o o d.  J. ROCK JOHNSON: And your email address, ma'am?  
MS. HOBGOOD: My email address; it's hobgoodtd.  J. ROCK JOHNSON: I'm simply asking for your email address. I can't make it out, so it's t and then there's another letter? Would you just please tell me that letter; you said it but I didn't hear it.  
MS. HOBGOOD: I understand that. If you can just conclude your comments, I'd really appreciate it.  J. ROCK JOHNSON: My comment is I do not believe it is in the national interest of the United States of America, nor the United States of America as a citizen of this world, of this globe, for this pipeline to go through, as we have learned about it in terms of its original application and the Draft Environmental Impact Statement and the Supplemental Environmental Impact Statement. My understanding is that we are currently in a final comment period of which these public hearings are a part. And we have until the 9th of October; and I believe the phone number for the White House was given; I wrote it down but of course I wouldn't be able to find it right away. It's I belive 202.456.1111. Does that sound right? Thank you. So if this is an ultimate decision by the President of these United States, what is in our global interest, our national interest, and the interests of Nebraska. I believe we would do something in addition to an environmental impact statment. I'm told by the folks at the front desk that the environmental impact statement includes an environmental justice section, and that section includes the social impact. I should like to see a separate, distinct, independent impact statement called a social impact statement. I believe a good part of what would be the content of a social impact statement has been heard here tonight. So I do not believe it is in the best interest, and our best national interest to do anything that could conceivably offer any risk of harm. This is not about risk management; this is about a unique geological formation. I look forward to looking at the environmental impact statment, the geological information that's there, the hydrological information that's there, and being able to receive a copy of the transcript. Thank you. If I may, fieldsurvey@earthlink.net And I thank you all so much for coming here. I welcome you to Nebraska, I hope you'll come back again and spend more time in the Sand Hills.  
MS. HOBGOOD: And thank you for your comments.  That concludes the speaker's list, and I'd like to just emphasize that all of the comments made here will be transcribed. We thank you for coming and expressing your views; and again I'd like to stress that the Department of State has not made a decision on the Keystone XL pipeline. Again, thank you for coming. This concludes our public meeting. 