
Dear Secretary Clinton:

As members of the House of Representatives who are concerned with
the public health and the preservation of our natural resources
and environment, we write to express our concern regarding the
permitting process for TransCanada's proposed Keystone XL tar sands
oil pipeline. This pipeline would deliver up to 900,000 barrels
per day of tar sands oil from Alberta, Canada over 2,000 miles to
refineries on the U.S. Gulf Coast, more than doubling U.S. consumption
of tar sands oil. Because the issuance of a presidential permit to
build this pipeline would have significant energy and environment
implications for our nation for many years to come, we believe the
permitting process should be done with the full consideration of the
Administration's clean energy and climate change priorities.

To issue a presidential permit for this pipeline, the Department of
State must determine whether the project is in the national interest,
and a complete Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) should inform this
determination. However, the Department of State recently released
a Draft EIS for the pipeline that does not adequately consider the
project's climate change impacts.

We believe that a full lifecycle assessment of the greenhouse gas
emissions for tar sands would provide the Department of State with
necessary information to determine whether issuing a presidential
permit for the pipeline is consistent with the Administration's clean
energy and climate change priorities.

Numerous scientific studies have found tar sands oil to produce much
higher lifecycle greenhouse gas emissions than convention oil.

Further, we also believe that given the Administration's commitment to
transparency, it is important for the Department of State to clearly
and openly articulate its criteria for weighing the pipeline's
climate change impacts against other considerations. At present,
our understanding is that the determination of national interest is
a highly discretionary process. We believe a decision that could have
substantial implications for America's clean energy future should be
made with the same level of transparency that the Administration has
exercised in other matters.

Therefore, we request that the permitting process continue after
the following conditions are adequately developed, assessed, and
incorporated:

• The Council on Environmental Quality's pending National
Environmental Policy Act (NEPA)

Guidance on the Consideration of the Effects of Climate Change and
Greenhouse Gas Emissions should be applied to this project. The
permitting process for this pipeline, which will likely have
significant greenhouse gas and climate change implications, should
not proceed until this guidance is finalized and can be reviewed and
incorporated into the EIS.

• The Environmental Protection Agency should conduct a comprehensive
life-cycle greenhouse gas assessment for tar sands oil. We should
only move forward after this assessment is complete and the full
impact of tar sands oil can be understood.

• The Department of State should collaborate closely with the Council
on Environmental Quality to ensure that a robust and transparent
inter-agency review process is conducted, as directed by Executive
Order 13337. This will help ensure that all agencies with relevant
expertise can participate and that the full environmental and social
impacts of this project are adequately

• The Department of State should develop specific criteria
for weighing the pipeline's climate change impacts against other
considerations in making its determination of national interest.

These criteria should be developed through a transparent inter-agency
process.

As members of Congress, we are bound to protect the national interest
of this country and its citizens.

Building this pipeline has the potential to undermine America's clean
energy future and international leadership on climate change; we ask
that the Department of State exercise due diligence in its permitting
process for Keystone XL, carefully weighing all impacts of the project.