I read with some dismay reports or your comments last Friday before
the Commonwealth Club of San Francisco regarding the proposed Keystone
XL pipeline. While you acknowledged that you "haven't finished all
of the analysis" and your staff indicated they are still reviewing
"the thousands of comments we have received" your indication that
the State Department "is inclined" to grant approval for the pipeline
appears to prejudge the outcome as a forgone conclusion.

A premature decision of this magnitude is unfortunate, especially in
light of the significant concerns I outlined to you in a letter the
previous day regarding the proposed pathway of this pipeline. I do
not object to oil pipelines in Nebraska, but there is a heightened
environmental sensitivity when a pipeline traverses an irreplaceable
natural resource, the Ogallala Aquiler, with little examination of
potentially preferable alternatives. Furthermore, your department's
Draft Environmental Impact Statement (DEIS) fails to assess in a
substantive manner the porous soil along the proposed route, which
may make the aquifer especially susceptible to a potential spill. At
stake is the essential source of 78 percent of Nebraska's drinking
water, yet the DEIS and your comments lead me to believe it is this
Administration's intention to simply accept the pipeline route as
proposed.

As stated in my letter dated October 14, 2010, the DEIS considered
no alternatives to a route originating from Morgan, Montana, and
offers no explanation for the limited scope of the analysis. This
concern could be addressed by evaluating an existing TransCanada
pipeline route which crosses the Eastern part of Nebraska and may
be a preferable route for the Keystone Xl  pipeline. The existing
pathway represents a far shorter route through the U.S. than those
considered in your department's analysis.

Your comments inspire Further doubt as to the validity of the review
process undertaken by the departmen: As a former Cabinet Secretary,
I understand the importance of avoiding
prejudgement of a pre-decisional document that is still under
review. Doing otherwise would not be consistent with the Administrative
Procedures and would risk disenfranchising those "thousands" of people
who took the time to comment on this important DEIS.

I ask that you reassert your resolve and that of your staff to ensure
that all [ineligible] comments are fairly evaluated, other shorter
and potentially more environmentally sound routes are examined, and
the final decision is based on the best interest of our nation. I
look forward to your prompt reply.
