I write concerning the Keystone XL pipeline project under consideration
by the Department of State. As you may know, I have repeatedly
expressed concern that regulatory actions related to this permit
application be executed such that maximum care is taken to safeguard
the Ogallala Aquifer, an irreplaceable natural resource in the state
of Nebraska. As noted in the Draft Environmental Impact Statement
(DEIS) released on April 16 of this year, the Aquifer “...supplies 78
percent of the public water supply and 83 percent of irrigation water
in Nebraska.” The document further acknowledges that “...crude
oil could migrate into subsurface aquifers and into areas where these
aquifers are used for water supplies.”

As a Senator, it is my duty to review federal actions that might
impact resources critical to the State of Nebraska. My letter to
you on July 23, 2010, reflected these concerns. Since then, I have
continued to review materials related to the permit application and
its environmental review documents. I am troubled by the product of
that review. The information below outlines my additional concerns
and asks for additional review by the Department of State.

I noted with interest that the alternative route discussion in
the DEIS considers only routes that originate at or near Morgan,
Montana, and therefore the shortest route was not considered. Because
the preferred route is roughly a straight line between Steele City,
Nebraska, and Morgan, Montana, any derivation from that straight line
describes a line or alternative route that necessarily crosses more
land. It comes as no surprise then that the alternatives considered
in the DEIS are rejected. As the DEIS explains, longer pipeline
length generally corresponds to greater environmental impact. The
Express-Platte Alternative, for example, is rejected, it appears,
principally because it is longer than the proposed route:

“...(T)he greater length of the Express-Platte Alternative, and
the associated greater area of impacts and the likely requirement
for construction along a new ROW. ..indicate that this alternative
would not be environmentally preferable to the proposed route.”

Understanding the primary role that distance plays in the consideration
of pipeline alternative routes, I was disturbed by the fact that
the DEIS contains no substantial discussion of a route that would
run parallel to the existing Keystone pipeline route from Steele
City, Nebraska, north to the U.S. border in Cavalier County, North
Dakota. This route would be far shorter than the proposed route,
and shorter than every alternative considered in the DEIS. And if -
as the DEIS has argued - shorter distance generally coincides with a
less severe environmental impact, then one could conclude that such a
route would be better for the environment. In addition, such a route
would avoid running directly through the sandy soils in the Sandhills
region of Nebraska. Finally, it would seem to me that such a route
could serve the purpose and need of the pipeline: delivering crude
oil from important sources in Canada to refining facilities in the
United States. To your knowledge, has the Department of State or any
other federal agency reviewed this route as an additional alternative
to those considered in the DEIS? If the Department of State has not,
I ask that such an alternative route be explored.

Moreover, the DEIS appears to ignore entirely the possibility of border
crossings other than those that cross at or near Morgan, Montana. I am
not aware of any language in the Presidential Order establishing the
Department of State as the lead agency for this permit application
that would preclude consideration of an alternative border crossing
that might allow for a shorter route. Has the Department of State or
any other federal agency involved in the permit process considered
alternative routes that would include border crossings other than
at or near Morgan, Montana? If the Department of State has not,
I ask that the scope of the DEIS be broadened to include alternate
border crossings.

It would be of considerable concern to me if U.S. consideration of
the potential routes within our country for a proposed pipeline has
been limited by the terms of a permit previously issued by another
country. What impact, if any, does the applicant's acquisition
of required permits in Canada have on the consideration of border
crossings other than at or near Morgan, Montana?

Review of the DEIS discussion of alternative routes reveals no
substantial discussion of the avoidance of the Sandhills region of
Nebraska. As you know, two of the alternatives considered in that
section do not substantially cross the Sandhills. This is noteworthy
because this region contains soils that are dramatically different
from those in other regions of Nebraska. The character of these
soils might be environmentally significant in the context of the
DEIS. The document acknowledges, for example, that crude oil adheres
differently to sandy soils and may penetrate them faster than it would
other soil types. Has the Department of State or any other federal
agency considered or otherwise explored whether there is environmental
benefit to a route that avoids the Sandhills region? If so, I would
ask that you share that analysis with me. If neither you nor another
federal agency involved in the permitting process has conducted such
an analysis, I would ask that you broaden the scope of the DEIS to
include such an analysis.

Thank you for your attention to this important matter. I am acutely
aware of our country's need for oil. I believe it is in our national
interest to obtain oil from allies instead of from those who may not
share our values. The appropriate construction and use of oil pipelines
can directly meet this national interest. However, U.S. law assigns to
the Department of State the responsibility of ensuring the impacts and
alternatives to this proposed pipeline have been thoroughly examined
and assessed. At this time — and until my questions are answered
— I am concerned that the contents of the DEIS do not sufficiently
meet this responsibility. I look forward to your prompt reply.
