The Laborers' International Union of North America, like most unions
and most working people, care deeply about the environment. We are
active partners in the Blue-Green Alliance, which strives to create
good jobs that build an environmentally sustainable economy, while
also putting some green in workers' pockets. We believe that we must
care for the planet and the people on it.

However, we have become deeply alarmed at the strident, inflexible
rhetoric that some in environmental, academic and Hollywood circles
have embraced around the Keystone XL pipeline. As these activists
pressure the White House in a last-ditch effort to delay or block
the pipeline deal, they should be more concerned about the damage
done to our country should the deal fall through.

Torpedoing the Keystone deal would be a direct attack on thousands
of men and women who are desperate to be employed: Americans who
have lost their jobs, their homes and their livelihoods. Opponents
of the deal have downplayed the number of jobs the Keystone deal
will create. They often cite a study which was designed to develop
an argument against Keystone XL, in part criticizing the temporary
nature of the jobs the project would create. That is disingenuous,
as virtually all construction jobs are by nature temporary, albeit
Keystone XL construction jobs will last much longer than typical
construction jobs. Those who would block Keystone are naïve to think
that private companies fund enough "green construction" jobs to put
people to work now at the same level as would a cross-border pipeline.

Environmentalists risk isolating themselves even further from unions
and working people over the Keystone XL-thousands of men and women
who are just like Bruce Pearson. The 36-year-old South Dakota pipeline
worker and father of four calls Keystone not "just a pipeline," but a
"lifeline." It is unlikely those lining up to shout down the Keystone
deal have experienced the challenges Pearson has faced. "I've been out
of work while trying to raise a family. You don't know where you're
going to get the house payment. You worry your family might go hungry."

In the pursuit of making Keystone a flashpoint, some environmental
groups are showing their true colors. Their extreme ideology just
doesn't allow them to sympathize with people like Pearson, who is
struggling to get by.

Some in the academic community have jumped in to the debate as well,
focusing on the impact on the oilsands in Alberta. The Canadian
company that would construct the pipeline has made it clear oilsands
development will continue -- either to deliver oil to the United
States, lessening dependence on oil from hostile nations, or to China.

LIUNA members are angry and surprised that some of our fellow union
brothers and sisters, who don't have any members in the pipeline
industry and who themselves have never worked on a pipeline, now
speak out as pipeline experts in their attempt to block Keystone. For
thousands of LIUNA workers, the stakes are too high to not hold
them accountable.

Laborers are well trained and they have the expertise of working in
the traditional fields of oil and gas distribution. They are part of
the workforce that does the hard and dirty job of extracting energy
from this Earth, and they know we have to balance the need for jobs
with protecting the environment.

Until our country doesn't need energy and our demand for it stops
growing, working people will look for jobs to make ends meet. They
know how to build pipelines, how to build nuclear plants and how
to work in the coal industry. They also are trained and skilled in
making sure this work is done safely and in the least environmentally
destructive way possible.

Unfortunately, the sparks over the Keystone pipeline have been fanned
into a raging political bonfire. If the President stops the pipeline,
he is working against his own call for businesses to create private
sector jobs and Secretary Clinton's call for foreign investment
in our country. We believe that this president and administration,
unlike others, is not willing to kick workers while they are down.

Terry O'Sullivan is General President of LIUNA -- the Laborers'
International Union of North America.
