Impact of oil spill will be profound

    Jun 7, 2010

The impact of the Gulf oil spill on U.S.energy policy will be profound
and long-lasting.

The image of toxic oil spurting from the ruptured PB pipe a mile
beneath the ocean surface is seared into the national consciousness.

Prior to the disaster, the risks of offshore drilling seemed almost
hypothetical.

Now they are real. Even though PB apparently met with some success
last week when it installed a containment cap, millions of gallons
of oil already have poured into the Gulf, and will continue to spread
in the summer months.

Americans are addicted to oil, but even the most self-absorbed must
realize that the economic and environmental costs of offshore oil
well disasters on this scale cannot be tolerated, purely as a matter
of self-interest.

The credibility of the oil industry is in shreds. Prior to drilling,
BP officials claimed in its application that a spill was unlikely and
even if it did happen, the amount would not exceed 4,600 barrels and
would dissipate within 10 days.  People are also reading…

The reports that have leaked out since then of the decision-making
during drilling paint a picture of harried workers under management
pressure to make quick drilling progress. A cheaper single-wall
pipe was used rather than a double-wall. Tests were not done to
ensure that cement in the well had hardened. The blow-out preventer
had a dead battery. Some critics allege that the standard blowout
preventer installed on the well was inadequate for use on a deep-water
well. Multiple indications of pressure building in the well were
ignored.

Ramifications already are being felt in Nebraska. Since oil from the
PB well started gushing into the Gulf, concern has risen about the
proposed Keystone XL pipeline project to carry crude from Alberta,
Canada through Nebraska to refineries on the Gulf Coast. The pipeline
would stretch from the South Dakota border near Atkinson and run
southeast, passing just west of York, and connect with another Keystone
pipeline near Fairbury.

Although the pipeline was announced months ago, the surge of letters
to the editor and activity by local environmental groups is relatively
recent. A portion of the proposed new pipeline would cross the Nebraska
Sandhills, buried in porous, sandy soil above the Ogallala aquifer,
the huge groundwater reservoir that is a state treasure.

Regulators in a preliminary report concluded that the chances of a
spill from the Keystone pipeline are low, and that a spill, in any
event, would be small in volume.

After the Deepwater Horizon disaster, however, that official assurance
is not nearly as convincing.