It's time to stand up for the Sandhills

Sep 24, 2011 0

Nebraskans finally will come face to face Tuesday with the decision-makers on the Keystone XL pipeline.

The stakes are high as the Department of State holds public hearings.

In more than a dozen editorials over the past year, we have pointed out the folly, potentially a tragic one, of allowing the pipeline's route to traverse the Sandhills over the Ogallala Aquifer. The Sandhills are the primary recharge zone for the aquifer, and at places the aquifer reaches the surface. The soil is very porous, which may allow any spill to reach the aquifer more quickly, and the fragile topography makes reclamation extremely difficult.

As the University of Nebraska-Lincoln's John Stansbury points out in an opinion piece for the Journal Star, the State Department's Final Environmental Impact Statement is severely lacking in independent scientific inquiry and has had a hefty amount of input from TransCanada, the company seeking to build the pipeline.

All along, there have been hints that the wheels were greased for approval. A year ago, Hillary Rodham Clinton commented in San Francisco that she, as secretary of state, was "inclined" to approve the pipeline. A former top Clinton campaign aide, Paul Elliott, has a role as a TransCanada lobbyist. State Department special energy envoy David Goldwyn even switched jobs this year to work on oil sands issues as a consultant and testified in favor of the Keystone XL.

Friends of the Earth obtained emails through a Freedom of Information Act request that they say show a cozy relationship between the State Department and TransCanada officials, with State officials seemingly coaching TransCanada on how to deal with pipeline critics.

Here in Nebraska, landowners describe being bullied into signing easements. TransCanada has ramped up its promotional campaign, even sponsoring the Nebraska State Fair and putting its logo above a "Husker Pipeline" video aired on the HuskerVision Jumbotron. NU athletic director Tom Osborne since has ended the sponsorship agreement.

Gov. Dave Heineman, a latecomer to the opposition camp, on Aug. 31 sent a letter to Clinton asking her to deny the pipeline a presidential permit, and on Wednesday he urged Nebraskans to speak up at the public hearings.

Unfortunately, state senators appear to have lost the momentum to pass state legislation on pipeline routing or safety because the governor would not take a leadership role in building consensus during the regular session on a bill or on calling a special session.

Regardless, we echo the call for Nebraskans to speak up.

In Memorial Stadium, fans know that when the opposing team is approaching the end zone, it's time to stand up and get loud.

Supporters of the perilous pipeline route now are reaching for the end zone.

Get loud.
