## Silence is Deadly

03 June 2011

The U.S. Department of State seems likely to approve a huge pipeline
to carry tar sands oil (about 830,000 barrels per day) to Texas
refineries unless sufficient objections are raised.

The scientific community needs to get involved in this fray now. If
this project gains approval, it will become exceedingly difficult to
control the tar sands monster.

Although there are multiple objections to tar sands development and
the pipeline, including destruction of the environment in Canada 1 and
the likelihood of spills along the pipeline's pathway, such objections,
by themselves, are very unlikely to stop the project.

An overwhelming objection is that exploitation of tar sands would
make it implausible to stabilize climate and avoid disastrous global
climate impacts. The tar sands are estimated (e.g., see IPCC AR4 WG3
report) to contain at least 400 GtC (equivalent to about 200 ppm CO2).

Easily available reserves of conventional oil and gas are enough to
take atmospheric CO2 well above 400 ppm. However, if emissions from
coal are phased out over the next few decades and if unconventional
fossil fuels are left in the ground, it is conceivable to stabilize
climate 2,3.

Phase out of emissions from coal is itself an enormous
challenge. However, if the tar sands are thrown into the mix it is
essentially game over. There is no practical way to capture the CO2
emitted while burning oil, which is used principally in vehicles.

Governments are acting as if they are oblivious to the fact that
there is a limit on how much fossil fuel carbon we can put into the
air. Fossil fuel carbon injected into the atmosphere will stay in
surface reservoirs for millennia. We can extract a fraction of the
excess CO2 via improved agricultural and forestry practices, but
we cannot get back to a safe CO2 level if all coal is used without
carbon capture or if unconventional fossil fuels are exploited.

A document describing the pipeline project is available at
http://www.keystonepipelinexl.state.gov/clientsite/keystonexl.nsf?Open
Comments, due by 6 June, can be submitted to
http://www.keystonepipeline-xl.state.gov/clientsite/keystonexl.nsf/CommentFset?OpenFrameSet
or by e-mail to keystonexl@cardno.com or mail to Keystone XL EIS
Project, P.O. Box 96503– 98500, Washington, DC 20090–6503 or fax
to 206-269-0098.

I am submitting a comment that the analysis is flawed and insufficient,
failing to account for important information regarding human-made
climate change that is now available. I note that prior government
targets for limiting human-made global warming are now known to
be inadequate. Specifically, the target to limit global warming to
2°C, rather than being a safe "guardrail", is actually a recipe for
global climate disasters. I will include drafts of the "Paleoclimate
Information" 4, "Earth's Energy Imbalance" 5 and "The Case for Young
People and Nature"3 papers, which are so far only published in arXiv;
we will submit revised versions of all of these papers for publication
this summer.

1 Asserted impacts include: irreversible effects on biodiversity,
the natural environment, reduced water quality, destruction of
fragile pristine Boreal Forest and associated wetlands, aquatic
and watershed mismanagement, habitat fragmentation, habitat loss,
disruption to life cycles of endemic wildlife particularly bird and
Caribou migration, fish deformities and negative impacts on the human
health in downstream communities.

2 Target atmospheric CO2: Where should humanity aim? Open
Atmos. Sci. J., 2, 217-231, doi:10.2174/1874282300802010217.

3
http://www.columbia.edu/~jeh1/mailings/2011/20110505_CaseForYoungPeople.pdf

4 Paleoclimate implications for human-made climate change,
http://arxiv.org/abs/1105.0968

5 Earth's energy imbalance and implications,
http://arxiv.org/abs/1105.1140

I also will comment that the pipeline project does not serve the
national interest, because it will result in large adverse impacts,
on the public and wildlife, by contributing substantially to
climate change. These impacts must be evaluated before the project
is considered further.  It is my impression and understanding that
a large number of objections could have an effect and help achieve
a more careful evaluation, possibly averting a huge mistake. Brief
pointed comments may be just as well as longer statements.  Jim Hansen
