I am writing in response to Senator Mike Johanns letter to you, dated
November 1, 2010, with respect to the State Department's review of
the proposed Keystone XL Pipeline Project. Senator Johanns requests
that the State Department prepare a Supplemental Draft Environmental
Impact Statement for the Project, based on his assertion that the
Draft Environmental Impact Statement (DEIS) dots not sufficiently
analyze alternative pipeline routes and certain soils impacts. As
discussed below, the routing alternatives analysis in the DEIS fully
takes into account all reasonable alternatives and satisfies the
Department's obligations and the public's interests in that regard.

Under the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA), the
environmental impact statement must consider a reasonable Hinge
of alternatives to the proposed action. 42 US.C. § 4332(2) (C)
(iii); 40 C.F.R. 1502.14(a). The range of alternatives that must
be examined is bounded by the "purpose and need" for the proposed
agency action. See 40 C.F.R.§§ 1502.13, 1508.9 (b). It is also
"bounded by some notion of feasibility." Vermont Yankee Nuclear
Power Corp. v. Natural Res. Def. Council, 435 U.S. 519, 551 (1978)
(Metalled statement of alternatives cannot be found wanting simply
because the agency failed to include every alternative device and
thought conceivable by the mind of man."). An agency need only
consider alternatives that are reasonable in light of its stated
objectives. ee J aguna Greenbelt. Inc. v. Dep't of Trans!), 42 F3d
517, 524 (9th Cit. 1994) (the "range of alternatives that must be
considered in the ES need not extend beyond those reasonably related
to the pm poses of the project."). An agency satisfies its obligation
to consider reasonable alternatives when its analysis is focused by
the primary objectives of the project.

Chapter 4 of the State Department's DES for the Keystone XL Project
includes an analysis of a range of reasonable alternatives to the
Project, based on the defined purpose and need of the Project. The
alternatives reviewed by the Department were derived based on
information provided by Keystone in its application, as well
as information and suggestions provided during public and agency
scoping, and through research and analysis conducted by DOS and its
environmental contractor. A reasonable range of alternatives was
defined and each alternative was analyzed to determine whether it
would meet a number of objectives:

•   Meet the Project's purpose and need;

•   Provide a feasible alternative to the proposed action;

•   Provide at least an equivalent level of Project benefit given
the potential environmental consequences.

To be considered in the DEIS, alternative pipeline routes generally
were requited to connect several Project control points. These
fixed control points place constraints on potential geographical
alternatives to achieve the Project's purpose and need. With respect
to the portion of the route that impacts Nebraska (the Steele City
segment), those control points are the international border crossing
between Saskatchewan and Montana near the town of Morgan, Montana and
the northern end of the Cushing Extension portion of the previously
approved Keystone Pipeline Project. The border crossing location is
a control point because it is directly south of the source of the
oil to be transported by the Project at Hardisty, Alberta, Canada The
northern end of the Cushing Extension is a control point because, with
only the addition of new pumping capacity, it allows the Project to
take advantage of the approved (and now constructed) Cushing Extension
portion of the Keystone pipeline system, thus avoiding some 298 miles
of new construction in order to deliver the oil to the Gulf Coast.

The proposed route and the alternative routes considered in the
DEIS take a generally diagonal path from the border crossing point
to the Steele City, Nebraska commencement point of the Cushing
Extension. This is the most environmentally sound approach because a
diagonal route is the shortest path between the two control points. The
DEIS explicitly recognizes that the shortest length for a pipeline
route is environmentally preferable: Development of alternatives
also considered the desire to reduce the line miles of pipeline that
would be required to reach the Project terminus. As a general rule,
each mile of the proposed Project would impact approximately 13 .3
acres during construction and 6.0 acres during operation .... As a
result, there are generally environmental advantages to keeping the
length of pipe required to reach the Project destination as low as
possible while considering other issues of concern. (DEIS page 4-10).
In his letter, Senator Johanns suggests that the Department should
consider a route that would run parallel to the existing Keystone
Pipeline route. Such a route would be fundamentally inconsistent with
the environmental advantages inherent in a direct diagonal route and
would significant!) , increase environmental impacts. To parallel
the Keystone Pipeline, the route would have to diverge from the
proposed route in Alberta and run to the east through Saskatchewan,
and Manitoba for 600 miles to a point where the route would turn
south and run through North Dakota, South Dakota and Nebraska. To
reach Steele City, Nebraska via this mute would require a total
of 1,241 miles of new pipeline construction. This compares to
the 1,028-mile length of the proposed Steele City segment of the
Keystone XL Pipeline. As recognized above, the additional 213 miles
of pipeline construction required by Senator Johanns' recommended r
oute represents an increase in length of 21 percent and would affect
nearly 3,000 more acres of land, significantly inn easing the impact to
the environment, as well as causing impacts to many more landowners.
The suggestion in Senator Johanns' letter fundamentally fails to
recognize or acknowledge that the route of the original Keystone
Pipeline minimized the environmental impact of that project because
Keystone was able to convert an underutilized portion of an existing
natural gas pipeline and avoid 537 miles of new construction. This
also resulted in a direct north-south route in the United States,
further reducing impacts. There is no similar opportunity to convert
an existing facility for Keystone XL. Accordingly, utilizing the
Keystone Pipeline pathway would result in significantly greater
environmental impact than the proposed diagonal route. Thus, any
perceived environmental advantage from paralleling the Keystone
Pipeline route would be heavily outweighed by the hundreds of miles
of additional new construction that such a route would require.

Within the parameters set out in the DEIS, induding recognition of
the control points, the Department considered a reasonable range
of potential route alternatives. Based on its assessment of these
alternatives, the Department determined that none of the identified
alternatives offered an environmental advantage over the proposed
route. Keystone submits that this conclusion is well founded and
fully justified.

Keystone understands the importance of Nebraska's special resources,
including the Sandhills and the vast Ogallala Aquifer. We take very
seriously our responsibility to ensure the integrity of our pipeline
system and our readiness to respond through every inch of the State
of Nebraska and all other states and provinces we traverse.

It is important to recognize that pipelines currently crossing over
the top of the Ogallala Aquifer transport a variety of products,
including crude oil similar to that to be transported by Keystone;
refined petroleum products such as gasoline, diesel fuel and jet fuel;
natural gas; and other products. As referenced in the attached fact
sheet, Pipeline Safety and the Ogallala Aquifer, more than 21,000 miles
of pipelines cross Nebraska. In addition, 6,000 barrels of crude oil
are produced daily in Nebraska and tens of thousands of barrels are
produced in adjacent states through the Ogallala Aquifer. In Nebraska,
17 of the 16 oil-producing counties sit atop the Ogallala Aquifer.

Senator Johanns' letter also suggests that a supplemental DEIS should
consider avoidance of the Sandhills region and any environmental
significance of soils composition. As discussed above, avoidance of
the Sandhills region by a route that departs from a diagonal approach
between the control points would dramatically increase environmental
impacts. Moreover, the DEIS addresses construction in the Sand hills,
including many special considerations and measures that would be
undertaken in that region. The DEIS also contains an extensive analysis
of soil compositions in the Project area (DEIS Section 3.2). Finally,
based on comments that have been received on the DEIS, the Department
can further address these issues in the Final EIS.

To conclude, there is no justification for conducting a supplemental
Draft Environmental Impact Statement in this case. The Department's
environmental review of the Keystone XL Project under NEPA has
been on-going for two years and continues at this time. It has been
open and transparent and has provided ample opportunity for public
involvement. To engage in a supplemental review of alternative
routes, such as the route suggested in Senator Johanns letter,
which is obviously environmentally inferior on its face, or for the
purpose of re-starting the on-going consideration of soils issues,
would elevate process over rational decision making, with no benefit
to the public, while unduly delaying the important pending national
interest determination. 