Dear President Obama:

On behalf of the 350,000 members of the United Association, I am
writing to request your strong support for the Keystone KXL Pipeline
project being developed by TransCanada, Inc. As discussed below, there
are specific regulatory actions pending before your Administration
which we request expeditious review and approval.

Here's why. Keystone KXL is a major $12 billion economic stimulus and
investment project that will substantially expand U.S. underground
pipeline infrastructure and capacity by constructing a safe and
reliable transmission facility for transporting crude oil from Canada
through the U.S. Midwest and to our Gulf Coast refineries. This
initiative not only fulfills sound U.S. energy policy goals, but
will spur robust employment opportunities for American workers in
the construction industry, as well as related industries.

Your vision for a modern U.S. energy policy calls for greater
energy independence, both for the sake of developing self-reliant
energy production and enhancing our national security. Working with
our Canadian partners, this project helps promote these critically
important goals and allows us to take a giant step forward in building
North American energy independence.

Of equal importance, the Keystone KXL project will serve as a
major engine for future job growth and help put Americans back
to work. Mr. President, as you know, the alarming fact is that
unemployment in the

U.S. construction industry is now over 20 percent. Our industry has
literally millions of people looking for work and far too many losing
their homes and facing other severe hardships.

Keystone KXL alone will create some 10,000 critically-needed jobs
for building trades workers. It is also estimated this project
will generate over 340,000 additional U.S. jobs between 2011 and
2015 in other affected industries, including manufacturing and
service industries. Significantly, all of this job-creation will
occur without a single dollar of federal stimulus funds. Moreover,
many state and local governments stand to benefit since they
will collect substantial tax revenues generated by this initiative
(over $100 million in property tax alone, plus sales, fuel and other
taxes). Local communities will benefit as well from new business and
employment opportunities that emerge as this nearly 2,000-mile pipeline
unfolds across the country. Keystone KXL is also a well-planned
project. TransCanada currently manages more than 35,000 miles of oil
and natural gas pipeline in the U.S. and it has done an exemplary job
of planning and organizing this project. Long-term transportation
contracts are already in place, as are numerous supply contracts
with U.S. equipment manufacturers. A great deal of the regulatory
work has already been completed as key approvals have been issued
from the Canadian government; other approvals have been secured
or are expected shortly from state governments in South Dakota and
Montana. Additional points regarding the status and positive impact of
the Keystone Project are set forth in the attached briefing document.

At this stage, there are two major regulatory actions needed from the
federal government to move Keystone KXL forward and that are crucial
to its success:

(a) A Presidential Permit from the State Department which requires
completion of an Environmental Impact Statement and a finding that
the project serves the national interest and;

(b) TransCanada has petitioned the Pipeline Hazardous Materials
Safety Administration (PHMSA) to use an updated design standard for
the Keystone XL pipeline, similar to that currently in use for gas
pipelines.  The updated standard reflects significant advances in
the manufacturing, metallurgy, testing and assessment of pipelines,
resulting in higher quality steel, and pipe and pipeline systems. These
advances have significantly reduced the risk of failure in pipelines.

The sooner these actions are completed, the more the project's success
will be guaranteed. Conversely, the more they are delayed, the more
the project will be put at risk.

We understand that substantial progress has been made with respect to
each of these actions already and respectfully request the continued
support and assistance of your administration to finalize these
matters and, if at all possible, expedite them for the reasons set
forth above. In sum, please know that the United Association stands
firmly behind TransCanada and the Keystone KXL project. We believe this
project exemplifies the commitments we share with your Administration
of promoting energy independence, putting people back to work, and
helping our country get on the road to economic recovery.

Thank you again for your strong commitment to the United Association
and your continuing efforts on behalf of all working men and women
across America.

Sincerely,