**ES.1 INTRODUCTION**

TransCanada Keystone Pipeline, LP (Keystone) has applied to the
U.S. Department of State (DOS) for a

Presidential Permit for the proposed construction, connection,
operation, and maintenance of a pipeline and associated facilities at
the United States border for importation of crude oil from Canada. DOS

receives and considers applications for Presidential Permits for such
oil pipeline border crossings and associated facilities pursuant to
the President's constitutional authority over foreign relations, and as

Commander-in-Chief, which authority the President delegated to DOS
in Executive Order (EO) 13337, as amended (69 Federal Register [FR]
25299). DOS's jurisdiction to issue a Presidential Permit for the
border crossing and the associated facilities at the border.

DOS, as the lead agency for the environmental impact statement (EIS),
discussed the appropriate level of participation required with other
federal agencies that will be required to issue permits associated with
the proposed Keystone XL Pipeline Project (Project). The following
federal agencies and one state agency have elected to participate as
cooperating agencies in the process:

• U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)

• U.S. Department of the Interior, Bureau of Land Management (BLM)

• U.S. Department of the Interior, National Park Service (NPS)

• U.S. Department of the Interior, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
(USFWS)

• U.S. Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation
Service (NRCS)

• U.S. Department of Agriculture, Farm Service Agency (FSA)

• U.S. Department of Agriculture, Rural Utilities Service (RUS)

• U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE)

• U.S. Department of Energy, Western Area Power Administration
(Western)

• U.S. Department of Transportation, Pipeline and Hazardous Materials
Safety Administration

(PHMSA), Office of Pipeline Safety (OPS)

• Montana Department of Environmental Quality (MDEQ)

The U.S. Department of Interior, Bureau of Reclamation (Reclamation)
has agreed to provide technical assistance to DOS in the environmental
review process. Reclamation has responsibilities for federal water
supplies in the West. The proposed pipeline would cross beneath one
of Reclamation's canals in

South Dakota.

Certain county governments in Nebraska have agreed to be assisting
agencies, and as such would work with DOS to ensure that the EIS
incorporates local planning processes and/or laws. These counties are:

Fillmore, Greely, Holt, Merrick, Nance, Saline, and Wheeler. In
Nebraska, the Lower Big Blue Natural

Resources district and the Upper Elkhorn Natural Resources district
have also agreed to be assisting agencies. Various other state and
local resource agencies from each of the states crossed by the proposed

Project have responsibilities for state and local permit issuance
(see Table 1.8-1).
